H&E The Ruby Guardian
H&E Shadow Chain Dancer
H&E Door of Khe, Part 1
H&E Door of Khe, Part 2
H&E Golden Pine Cone and Snake, Part 1
H&E Golden Pine Cone and Snake, Part 2
H&E The Crazy Guardian
H&E Lady of Flowing Time, Part 1
H&E Lady of Flowing Time, Part 2
H&E Eye of Destiny
H&E Dancing Lady Golden Figurine
H&E Bow of Barefri

“So why are you guarding the ruby anyway?”

Hecto Safan waited for a reply. When none came, he shrugged dejectedly and toyed with the lunch he had made. Frustration furrowed the young man’s brow. The fire crackled pleasantly and the heady aroma of roasted boar filled the clearing, but the large being across from him was completely indifferent to it.

Evascor laughed with a gently rolling rumble, put another rock in his mouth, and crunched on it. “Thank you for the river rocks. I haven’t had these in a long time.”

The young man raised his voice. “The last Mariguez king has been gone for hundreds of years. Whoever tasked you with guarding this cave has been dead for centuries. I just don’t get it.”

The large stoney figure across the fire laughed again, though it came as a soft roar. The creature had the shape of a man, eight or nine feet tall, made of stone interlaced with ornate decorations of metal. His face was gray rock–curving spirals of shining metal highlighted his features. He regarded Hecto with dark eyes and spoke with a voice that rolled like distant thunder.

“What would you do with the ruby anyway?”

Behind the giant figure rose a steep hill covered with jagged rocks. A cave plunged into the hillside. It revealed only darkness, but feeling an ache, Hecto knew the ruby lay within.

“I would be king! That’s the whole point! It’s not just a gem the size of my fist, it’s the key to even greater power and wealth.” He stood and slapped dirt off his battered red garments. He waved his hands fiercely. “I’d have no more scrambling and struggling to stay alive. The ruby is the heart of the Mariguez Kingdom. A line of kings held the ruby, and each man who claimed it rose to the throne.”

The stone figure chuckled. “I know, I was there.”

“Look, why don’t you let me have the ruby, and I’ll let you guard it for me.”

Evascor smiled. “What kind of king would you be?”

Hecto considered. “A fair ruler. Loved by my people.”

“With lots of gold.”

“Well... sure, gold. I would ensure the kingdom was renowned for peace, prosperity, and learning. I studied many, many scrolls about the kings of Mariguez to find this place. I would continue their glorious destiny.”

The stony giant gazed up at the sky and said softly, “Fourth seventh.” Then he stood and hefted a giant longsword. He stepped away from Hecto and the fire, and started an intricate fighting routine in front of the cave. He took a giant step forward with a loud thud, sweeping an arm through the air, knocking back a row of imagined attackers. He brought his sword up, readying it against an onslaught.

Each step he took was precise. His stone form moved with startling grace and fluidity.

“At least let me see it!” Hecto cried.

The creature reached a pause in his routine and regarded Hecto. “I like you, but if you enter the cave I’ll have to kill you.” Then he swung the sword in a singing arc and resumed his routine.

Hecto’s dismay deepened. He was an experienced swordsman, but his sword was pathetic compared to the giant stone form of the guardian. His shoulders slumped.

“I can’t believe I traveled all this way, across a desert and two seas, and here I am sitting outside the cave that holds the Mariguez Ruby. Watching a statue dance around with a sword.”

“I like this routine. It is fashioned for twenty-four attackers.” Evascor plunged his sword through the air into an imaginary foe.

Hecto sighed. “I’m going to the river to get some water. Do you want more river rocks?”

“Yes, please.” Evascor brought the sword down in a sweeping arc that took out two phantasmal assailants.

Hecto crashed through the forest, muttering to himself as he stepped over logs and pushed away branches. “I can’t believe I left my home in fair Alevely for this. I had opportunities there. Even though I kind of had to leave.” Shortly he arrived at the bank of the small river. Birds chirped and the midday sun sent shafts of brilliance through the trees. But to Hecto it looked drab and lifeless, painted over with the vision of him not obtaining the Ruby of Mariguez.

He filled his waterskin, and then looked up at the dirty face of a man in worn brigandine armor.

The two regarded each other for a long moment.

More men broke through the forest and approached. They didn’t look friendly or happy to see Hecto. The first man scowled. Without saying a word, he gestured. A man to his side brought up a crossbow and let loose a bolt.

Hecto was already stumbling backwards through the forest. The bolt whistled past his ear. He turned and rushed through the trees.

Another bolt flashed past him. When it struck a tree in front of him, it exploded. Flying splinters stung Hecto’s face. It left a huge gouge in the trunk. He turned and saw the dirty man in brigandine draw his sword. It shimmered and cast off unnatural waves of force.

He came to the clearing in front of the cave with the fire. Evascor had finished his routine and was crunching on the last of the river rocks. When he saw Hecto, his face lit up. Then he grew glum when he saw Hecto had not brought the river rocks he promised. “I thought you were going to bring more rocks.”

Hecto ran up to him, casting furtive looks around him. “Men are coming. Armed. About a dozen of them. They have enchanted weapons.”

“Yeah, they usually do.”

“I think they want to take the ruby.”

“Why do you care? You’re not guarding it.”

“I don’t think they want the competition.”

Evascor pursed his rocky lips as best stone lips can be pursed. “Then you’d better hide.”

Hecto ran for the cave.

“Not in there!” Evascor called out.

Drawing his sword, Hecto sighed heavily and ran into the woods away from the men. He scanned desperately for a good hiding place.

What he found was more men crashing through the forest from the other side. One drew a sword that shone with a mystic blue blaze.

He briefly considered scrambling up the rocky hillside, but then an arrow alight with blazing flame sailed past him and he went back to the previous plan.

He ran back into the clearing and up to Evascor.

The stoney giant looked at him with dark eyes. “I thought you were going to hide.”

Hecto panted with both exertion and panic. “More of them. Another dozen or so. No place to go. You have to let me in the cave or they’ll cut me down before they even get to you.”

Evascor regarded him thoughtfully.

Hecto’s heart pounded. “I’ll bring you an armload of river rocks. Two armloads.” He looked at the gray creature with desperate eyes. The stoney giant stayed silent. Hector pleaded, “Look, I’ll tell you more stories of ancient Mariguez and the kingdoms that followed it!”

Evascor sighed a huge stoney sigh. “Oh all right. But don’t touch anything. If you touch anything, I’ll know and ….”

“You’ll have to kill me!” shouted Hecto as he disappeared into the dark cave.

He peeked out the entrance to the cave as wild warriors ran into the clearing with shining swords and axes held high. Evascor turned to meet them. He took a giant step forward with a loud thud, sweeping an arm through the air, knocking back three of them. He readied his giant sword against the rush of men armed with deadly enchanted weapons.

Hecto slipped deeper into the cave. Behind him came explosions and the sound of steel clashing with steel. And the anguished cries of men being cut down. When the light grew too thin and he plunged into inky darkness, he reached into the pouch on his belt and brought forth a glowstone. Ridiculously expensive for how little light it brought, it did provide enough for him to move through the cave.

The sounds of battle intensified. He wasn’t worried, though. Evascor had been guarding the cave’s mouth for a very long time.

As he walked, the air cooled, and smelled increasingly musty and earthy. He came to an archway crafted of unusual dark stone. He stepped through it.

The room was piled with gold, jewels, and treasures as he had never seen before.

In the soft light, large gems flashed from around the room. Gigantic jars of exotic spices and herbal mixtures lined the walls. Elaborate golden ornaments and devices crowded table after table. Exotic Mariguez statues stood among them, all of them laden with heavy jewelry. The scene before him glittered even with the faint light of the glowstone.

In the center of the room stood a platform. A figure lay there. Hecto approached. It bore the mummified corpse of a great man, dressed in the fine but disintegrating robes of a king. The king’s arms folded over his chest. The Mariguez Ruby sat on his chest.

Hecto trembled. In the faint light of the glowstone, the ruby looked black, not red. But it cast back the faint rays like no other gem on the planet could. Hecto took a step forward. He took another. His trembling turned into shaking. The ruby was so close. Only his force of will held his hand from reaching out to take it.

“Pretty, isn’t it?” came the rumbling voice of Evascor behind him.

Hecto stepped back. He was still shaking badly. “This is a tomb.”

“Yes, the king himself lies here,” said the rocky giant.

Hecto looked back nervously toward the entrance. “The adventurers …?”

Evascor shook his head and shrugged. “There were only twenty-four of them.”

Hecto grew silent. Gears started spinning in his head. “But if this is a tomb, and the ruby is here, then this is the last king of Mariguez.”

The stoney giant nodded. “There came no more after him. Or so I am told. I’ve been here outside the cave ever since.”

A faint thought formed in Hecto’s head. It began to whirl around. Fleeting, just out of view. Teasing him. “But,” he said softly.

Evascor regarded him curiously.

The idea formed into a strong breeze. Then a gale. Then peals of thunder sounded in his head. His heart beat rapidly. “But,” he said more firmly. “This is not the last king of Mariguez.”

Evascor raised his eyebrows as much as his stony face would allow. “What do you mean?”

“There’s a line of succession, is there not?”

“Sure.”

“And it has to be pretty long.”

“All right.”

“But. But the Mariguez Kingdom has been dead for all these long centuries. So the only surviving member of that kingdom ….”

“Is me,” Evascor said, in almost a whisper.

“This is not the tomb of the last king,” Hecto said, the confidence building in his voice. “Because you are the last surviving member. You are the king of Mariguez.”

Evascor fell silent.

Hecto leaned in. “So what do you say? Shall we take the ruby -- your ruby -- and travel out to gain our fortune and claim a kingdom?”

The huge stoney giant regarded Hecto for a long time. So long that Hecto felt his heart flutter, and his confidence wane. Then the giant figure spoke in his rumbling voice.

“All right.”

----

Sometimes the greatest treasures are not hidden at all, but waiting for anyone daring enough to try to claim them. But the wise treasure hunter knows, when searching for such a treasure, pay careful attention to its stories.

#

"You can't start a story with the weather," Hecto said, huddled under a stone outcropping with a red blanket wrapped around him as torrential rain pounded the valley beyond. "Or a quote."

A flash of lightning illuminated the sky, casting Evascor in silhouette. Seconds later, the boom of thunder echoed through the valley.

"But it was a dark and stormy night," Evascor protested. "Just like tonight." The stone and metal giant sat cross-legged in the rain, seemingly unbothered by the heavy raindrops. Water ran down his imposing figure. Standing, he would be eight or nine feet tall. Elaborate lines of metal interlaced through the granite of his face and body, highlighting his fierce features.

Blackened steel chains over both shoulders crossed around his chest and met in the center, where they held a strong box of thick steel. Sitting in the rain, he did not look like the King of Mariguez. But he was.

Hecto asked, "Aren't you hungry?" He reached out from beneath the blanket with both hands to roll a heavy round rock toward Evascor.

The giant shook his head glumly as rivulets ran down his face.

Hecto tightened the blanket around him. "All right, tell me the story."

Evascor spoke with a voice like rolling thunder that echoed the booming of the skies.

#

It was a dark and stormy night.

Just like tonight, in this very valley, except it was almost a thousand years ago. I sat in the tent with the group of seven king's guards, on a special mission to destroy the Dancing Shadow Chain.

Well, I should say, six members of the guard–and Pipeto.

The chain had come to the kingdom in the possession of a traveling noble, Dumarquere Maralain. It was a priceless treasure, a mystic artifact that formed a shadow standing in the air of a beautiful dancer in profile wearing only a golden belly chain.

She was legendary, and word spread around the kingdom of her lithe and supple figure. Her moves captured the most seductive and exotic of all the wild dances of all the cultures of the world.

That was a dark and stormy night, too, but we were warm and dry inside the castle after the King's banquet for the visiting nobles and merchants. They were drunk from exotic wines. The air was rich with the smells of smoking pipes filled with strange herbs from far away lands.

The court musicians played their most energetic and sexually charged fare while the dancer whirled and shimmied. Every man there said what a stunning beauty the shadow dancer was, like a living silhouette of sensuous curves, taking ownership of the room with her intoxicating moves. The Dumarquere had made no secret that when the music ended and the players left the room, the dancer would continue her entertainment with the most lurid and unnatural acts.

I watched her too, standing guard next to the king, and admitted she was pretty. But of course, that meant nothing to me.

Then one of the nobles leaned over to the Dumarquere and told him, laughing, she cuts a fine figure, but a woman like that would eat you alive.

The Dumarquere laughed out loud and drained his cup, but tragically, his mirth came too soon. The shadow dancer leaped, flying across the room, and landed on him. She dove her face into his chest and began tearing him apart. He screamed; the man next to him screamed; everyone was screaming. I ran and grabbed the shadow dancer, trying to pull her off.

People were running for the doors. Someone shouted, she's a monster! She has fangs! She has claws! She'll kill us all!

The dancer faced the room and hissed. She hunched over, her black claws dripping blood. She lunged for another noble, but I leapt forward and caught her in mid-air. I wrestled with her, but as I did, she lost her fair form and became more and more monstrous.

"How could you fight with a shadow?" Hecto asked.

Evascor said, "I was surprised that she had substance. I am strong, but not strong enough to hold a materialized shadow. She was fast, but her claws were useless against the stone and metal of my body. Neither of us could best the other."

In desperation, I grabbed at the golden chain around her waist, thinking that was the source of her power, but before I could get a hold, the shadowy creature twisted away and raced for a window. Smashing through with a vicious swipe of a claw, she leaped out into the storm.

The heavy rainfall interfered with my sight and hearing, so I quickly lost her. I could just see her scampering over the castle wall into the night.

The King called his Council together in an emergency session, and came to the conclusion that the creature was too dangerous to roam free. She had changed from an intoxicating dancer to a huge, violent monster with claws and fangs sharp enough to tear a man to pieces. They said they'd watched the creature grow and become more terrifying before their eyes; that no one in the kingdom was safe.

The king commanded the Captain of his elite guard, an officer named Maximo, to select a group of men to hunt the creature. He instructed me to accompany them, because I had faced the shadowy beast, and had the best chance of subduing her while the elite guard, armed with powerful magics, destroyed her.

Maximo selected five of his finest warriors to accompany him, and then called on his brother Pipeto to join them. Pipeto was a charming youth, but unserious. He was more skilled with his lute than a sword. Money, talent, and station were wasted on Pipeto–Maximo had watched the young man squander them on spirits, gambling, and sexual misadventures of epic scale. The captain was always looking for opportunities to guide his brother down a more substantial path. He hoped that being a part of the expedition, which surely could not fail, would bring Pipeto the notice of the King, and a start on a more responsible life journey.

"Why was Maximo so confident he could destroy the shadow creature?" Hecto asked, still wrapped in the red blanket, pulled up under his chin.

"That was Maximo," Evascor said. "He had faced many mythical beasts. Shadows, sprites, lizards, demons... he had faced and vanquished great threats to the kingdom before. Everyone in the party shared his confidence."

"Except Pipeto."

Evascor nodded. "He was so drunk when we set out he could hardly sit up on his horse. But the rest of them were eager for the fight."

Although the thing we hunted was shadow, we had no trouble tracking her. She had slashed her way through the forest in a wild, zig-zagging path, looking for what, we did not know.

Maximo warned Pipeto to always be on guard, because the thing was twice as tall as a man, overwhelmingly powerful, and bloodthirsty. If Pipeto showed his value to the expedition, he would gain great favor from the king.

After a couple of weeks, we tracked it to an uninhabited valley; a rugged place with harsh terrain that no one had been able to settle. We found a flat clearing near a small stream and set up camp.

We sat in a circle with the heavy rainfall pounding on our round tent.

"What exactly was their plan?" Hecto asked.

Evascor shrugged. "They didn't have much of a plan. Simply, find the beast and kill it."

Hecto raised the blanket over his chin tightened it around him.

"Hecto, that makes me wonder, what is our plan?"

"I want to see the creature. Spend some time getting a sense of how she works. We're relying on your sharp senses to detect her after the storm passes, so we can approach from a safe distance to observe. I believe that's how we'll find a way to claim the magic chain."

Evascor nodded. "I will watch for her."

Some of the guards had seen her the night that she went wild, and told stories of her size and ferocity. They exchanged grim, determined looks as they laid out their magical weapons, preparing for a mystic battle.

Only Pipeto seemed unconcerned, and he absently plucked at his lute, likely expecting to hang back with the horses while the others did the fighting. Maximo glared at his brother with open disdain.

The monster came after nightfall. The heavy raindrops made it hard for me to hear. And she was a shadow, after all.

Our encounter began as her giant claws ripped through the tent and the beast charged our party.

It was chaos. Men scrambled to get to their feet, trying to bring their magical weapons to bear. Lightning flashed, and the horses panicked, breaking free and running through the camp and out of the valley. The shadow creature was blindingly fast. In the roar of thunder, she seized two of the men by their heads and lurched back into the rain and darkness. We heard their screams, but only briefly. Then there was only the deafening sound of heavy rain.

The remaining warriors readied their weapons.

Pipeto forced himself back into the partially-collapsed tent, trying to hide in its folds.

The remaining three men ran after the creature, only to find her running at them. One man caught the creature's claw on an enchanted shield and the force of her blow threw him backward into a tree trunk with a fatal crack. Two men circled the beast, slashing at her with glowing swords.

One man engaged with the beast, then cried out, the beast is too powerful! Our weapons do not harm her! He emitted a gurgling cry and fell silent. His companion rushed forward, slashing and lunging, holding her back for only a moment before she jumped and pressed him to the ground. He cried out, she can't be killed! He held the shadowy maw back with the blade of his sword.

I raced forward and tried to pull the beast off him, but it was too late.

I wrestled with the shadowy thing, but it was hard–there wasn't much to hold on to. The beast was resistant to my strength, and she was fast. When I tried to reach for the golden chain around her midsection, she wiggled free before I could reach it.

Maximo stood at the collapsed tent, protecting his brother. He had the most powerful magical weaponry of anyone in the party. He called to me, I can kill her, let her come to me.

I got my feet on the thing and pushed hard. She sailed into the darkness toward Maximo.

Maximo had several magical weapons, the first of which cast a glowing net around the creature. But she surged forward nonetheless, no matter how tightly the net closed on her. He pulled forth a gem that shot powerful bolts of light. She screamed with pain and fury, but still pushed toward him. He called to me, Evascor, my magics don't affect her! Finally, he pulled forth his sword, and it burst into brilliant flames.

For a moment I hoped that the brightness from the sword would dispell the shadowy beast, but it did not. She tore the magical net off her and closed on him.

He fought back savagely. Then he cried out, Evascor! She is too powerful! Get Pipeto to safety!

I yelled, let me take the beast, and you run with your brother. It should be me to sacrifice myself.

No, he shouted, still fighting off the shadowy monster's claws. Save my brother.

So I did. I picked up the young man, who was petrified with terror, and ran into the dark night, unable to see well with the heavy raindrops around me, barely able to hear Maximo's final scream of rage and despair.

#

"You never saw the creature again?"

"No one ever returned to the valley," Evascor said, "Out of fear. Not in a thousand years. Of course, now this place is in the Wilds, since the kingdom of Mariguez fell."

Hecto nodded, thinking. "So we must rely on your amazing sight and hearing, once the storm subsides, to find the creature and gather information about it."

Evascor picked up the round rock lying beside him, considered the tasty morsel for a moment, then put it down.

"What happened to Pipeto?" Hecto asked.

"Now, that is an interesting story." Evascor leaned in. "Absolutely no one suspected, but it turned out that Pipeto had a special talent for–"

Behind Evascor, a giant shadow rose, a darker swath of black even than the black sky. Hecto managed to make one squeaking sound before the beast fell upon Evascor.

The shadowy creature was giant, easily taller than Evascor. The golden links of the chain around her middle were the size of Hecto's fist. She pounced, pressing Evascor to the ground with her giant claws.

"She's gotten bigger!" Evascor cried. "She is much stronger than she was before!"

Hecto brought the blanket up to his nose and watched with wide eyes.

Evascor spoke with heat. "Foul creature! You are more powerful than when we last met, but I have been fighting monsters for a thousand years since then." He performed a twisting maneuver that got him out from under the beast.

He reached with one hand to grasp the golden chain.

His voice pierced the darkness, sounding like a crash of thunder louder than that coming from the sky. "Now I have it. Time to end this."

But the creature was faster still, and a claw wrapped around Evascor's leg, and another clamped on his shoulder. The rocky giant tumbled back and fell into the mud.

The beast lunged, and Evascore barely managed to get a hand on the thing's shadowy throat as her maw pressed closer. The creature's back was like a black, bristly dome blotting out a big chunk of the night sky.

Lightning flashed directly above, simultaneous with an explosion of thunder, lighting up the scene of the shadowy beast hunched over the stoney giant.

Hecto barely peered over the blanket, but something about Evascor's story nagged at him. What was it? What had caused the beautiful dancer to become a feral monster? An idea swirled in his head, teasing him as he strained to pull it together. What was it the man said? That she would eat him alive?

Another flash filled the sky, accompanied by the boom of thunder. By the time the sound subsided, Hecto had it.

He looked at the shape of the thing, and said, "Look, it's a hedgehog."

The beast stopped and turned toward him as Evascor got his other hand around her throat.

Hecto continued, "She's not as big as they said she was."

Evascor managed to push her away. He grunted. "You're right, she's not as big as she was."

Famed by darkness, the dark beast braced for a lunge at Hecto.

"Look how soft and fuzzy her muzzle is," the young man said.

The shadow beast made a funny sound and sat back, allowing Evascor to sit up.

Hecto lowered the blanket from his face. "Actually, she's not very big at all. Her fur is really soft."

Evascor stood and looked down at the beast, who was glancing back and forth between Hecto and Evascor.

"She's really cute," Hecto said, the blood returning to his cheeks. "In fact, I could hold her in the palm of my hand."

He placed his hand on the ground, and the beast ran over and snuggled in it.

Evascor walked through the rain to the outcropping where Hecto sat.

Hecto said, "I'll put her in my bag. She wants to take a little nap."

The shadow beast made a happy squeak, and Hecto lifted her up by her chain–now a delicate strand not much thicker than a piece of twine–and lowered her into a leather bag. He tied the top off.

Evascor watched him for a very long moment. "I don't understand."

Hecto grinned broadly, evidently immensely pleased with himself. "Think about it. Clearly, from your story, the magic of the Shadow Chain Dancer is that she becomes what people say she is."

Evascor stood perfectly still in the downpour. Another flash of lightning lit the sky, followed a second later by roaring thunder.

Hecto held the leather bag up. "When they described her as a beautiful dancer, that's what she became. When they described her as a terrible monster, she became that."

"Huh," said Evascor.

"The power of the artifact is to take the form that people ascribe to it."

The stoney giant thought for a moment. "We created a lot of trouble for ourselves, didn't we?"

"The truth is, I think in her own way, she was unhappy when people said she was frightening, and came to this place hoping she wouldn't hurt anyone else."

Evascor sat down heavily in the mud, the rain running down his fierce features.

The two regarded each other for a long while, letting the events sink in.

"So," Hecto said. "Tell me about Pipeto."

"Well," Evascor said, picking up the large round rock beside him and taking a bite. His mouth full, he said, "That story starts with a dream I had."

----

Some would abandon all scruples to attain fantastical treasures. The honorable treasure hunter knows this well. They understand how hard it is to walk the path that leads to a treasure without falling into dark ways or despair.

 

King Evascor of Mariguez, standing almost nine feet tall, his granite body interlaced with elaborate designs of metal highlighting his fierce features, dropped his half-eaten rock. He put a giant gray hand on his friend's shoulder. "Hecto, someone is in trouble."

Hecto Safan, a tall youth in all red traveling clothes, looked down the wide cobblestone street, between houses and buildings worn grey and dull brown from the salty sea air of the city of Anin, in the southern kingdom of Theadin. The sounds of a busy port came from the waterfront, and overhead seagulls called out ha-ha-ha.

Down the street, from the direction they'd just came, rough-looking men dragged a kicking figure into an alley. Hecto rushed toward them. Evascor's heavy steps thudded behind him.

From the alley came the deafening roar of a horrible monster, reverberating through the street.

Hecto reflexively drew his shining sword. The thing in the alley cried out again, a deafening shriek of something huge preparing to strike.

Filthy men in ratty clothes burst from the alley. Hecto stopped, allowing them to scramble and drag themselves over the cobblestones to get free. Once in the street, they scattered like leaves in a gale.

The bellowing sounded again, assailing Hecto's ears. Sword in hand, he exchanged a look with Evascor, and then stepped into the alley.

A slight woman stood there, dressed in breeches and a short-sleeved leather jacket colored in purples and browns, with a large satchel over one shoulder. Her raven black hair fell almost to the ground as she reached to pick something up. The moment she lifted it, the roaring of the mighty creature stopped. She stood, her black hair reaching the middle of her back, and put the item into a pouch on her belt.

She turned.

"Jhirle," Hecto breathed.

Jhirle stepped toward Hecto, her ice blue eyes lighting up and a smirk spreading on her face. "Hecto Safan," she said. She appraised him head to toe. "I see you still wear red."

Hecto met her eyes; lingered a moment too long. He sheathed his sword. His eyes flickered, searching for a good rejoinder. "I look good in red," is where he landed.

She made a slight bow to Evascor. "Your Majesty."

Evascor nodded uncomfortably.

She laughed, her eyes narrowing as she took in the sight the pair. "What in the world are you doing here? Of all places."

"I could ask the same of you," Hecto said.

"I suppose you're hunting some great treasure," she said.

"We're in between treasures. How about you?"

She smirked again. "Taking in the sights."

His eyes grew thoughtful. "Why does that seem unlikely?"

"Anin is a beautiful city. I enjoy the sea air." She breathed in deeply through her nose, then coughed a little.

Hecto snapped his fingers. "Wait--no. It can't be."

"What?"

"You're here for the Bag of Unbounded Emptiness."

Jhirle's composure cracked for a moment, a frown flashing on her face. The smirk returned, and she raised her chin to Hecto. "I wouldn't know anything about that."

"But, Jhirle, Pratervine Mareste holds that." He took a step forward. "He's a merchant prince. He has mercenaries all over the city. You can't be serious."

She gave him a mysterious look. "Selling it would command a handsome sum." Then a brilliant smile. "Any interest?"

"I'm not a thief."

Their gazes met for a few heavy heartbeats. Hecto saw he was standing much closer to her than he realized. He took a step back.

He said, "I'm afraid the answer is no."

She arched one eyebrow at him.

He reached into his pouch and pulled out a very ancient yet shiny gold coin. "But you must be unsettled from your close call with those ruffians. Let me buy a soothing drink to calm you."

Jhirle laughed out loud at that.

***

They had the mid-day tavern to themselves, except for a scruffy old guy sitting across the room from them, lost in his own thoughts. The tavern lady came to their table and plunked down two large tankards in front of Hecto and Jhirle, and cast a glance that suggested annoyance and curiosity at Evascor, who was sitting on the floor at the head of the table crunching on a round rock.

Hecto turned a figurine over in his hands. It was a small clay lizard, with shiny bits of metal pressed into it all over, each like a tiny mirror. Even in the dim light of the tavern, it sparkled.

"This is what caused all that roaring in the alley? I've never seen such a trinket. I suppose it comes in handy."

She drank from her tankard. "You'd be surprised."

"Does it do anything else?"

"No, it just roars and scares people. But that's enough."

Hecto reached forward to place the clay lizard down on the table, but her hand shot forward and grabbed his wrist. "Don't set it down." Her bright eyes scanned the room. "Not while we're still thirsty." Meeting his eyes, she took the lizard from him gently and slipped it into her pouch.

Evascor, sitting on the floor beside the table, didn't have a drink, but there was a pile of rocks in front of him from the pond behind the tavern. The tavern woman had protested loudly at the request to gather them, but a shiny coin had reconciled her. Evascor picked one and bit it in half. He chewed happily.

Jhirle leaned forward. "How do you find the stones in these parts, King Evascor?"

Evascor smiled and nodded. Over his shoulder there was a heavy leather sash, from which hung a thick leather pouch, well-worn, as if handled out of habit. The pouch held the magnificent Ruby of Mariguez, which made Evascor king of that ancient kingdom. At the moment, however, the king was happy with his pond rocks.

"Jhirle," Hecto said, leaning forward. He glanced around to make sure no one was listening. "Let me talk you out of this foolish idea of taking the Bag of Unbounded Emptiness."

Jhirle shushed him. "You... know... who... has grown careless, and even with all his mercenaries, the word is he isn't taking care to protect you... know... what. It's a simple in and out job."

"If you are discovered, you'll have blazes to pay."

"Discovered? You know me better than that." Jhirle laughed and took a drink.

The door swung open and a couple of men in sailor's garb walked in, talking and laughing loudly. They glanced at Evascor with curious expressions before resuming their conversation and finding a table by a window.

Hecto leaned forward and spoke in a hush. "This life of a thief will bring you to a bad end. Look at us--we are doing very well with the treasures we've found." He opened his pouch, and slyly showed her the stack of ancient gold coins inside. "There's no need making enemies. Or always having to flee in terror of being hanged--or worse."

"Like you in Alevely?" Jhirle countered.

Hecto looked stunned. "That... that was different."

"Was it?" She chuckled.

Hecto lowered his voice but spoke with passion. "That was for love, not for greed."

Jhirle raised one eyebrow at him as she took another long drink.

Hecto leaned back. "Besides, what happened in Tayavinda? That's where I last saw you. I thought that was supposed to be your last adventure."

Jhirle took a deep breath. "Tayavinda. Yes. I sold the artifact for a boat loaded with gold and jewels."

Hecto raised his eyebrows. He smirked. "That artifact was nearly mine."

"It would have been, except for your foolish honor."

"What happened?"

"The boat sank," she said.

Hecto mulled that over, drinking.

Jhirle stood. "I have to make a stop outside. I'd like to have a fresh drink when I return, if your sense of honor permits it." She smiled sweetly, as she left.

Hecto noticed that her satchel had flipped open when they'd sat at the table. A parchment peeked out.

Hecto and Evacor exchanged a long look.

Hecto tip-toed his fingers over the tabletop toward the satchel. He raised an eyebrow at Evascor.

Evascor shrugged.

Taking a deep breath, Hecto pulled the parchments out of the satchel and appraised them.

"Evascor..." he said, reading. "This is incredible. Look at this. Here, and here." He leaned toward the gray giant. "Do you know what this is? This is amazing."

Evascor raised his eyebrows, to the extent he had eyebrows.

"She isn't here for some gaudy trinket like the Bag of Unbounded Emptiness." Tapping out each syllable with his finger, he said, "She is here for the lost treasure of Hasa Bun Khe."

Evascor turned to look in the direction Jhirle had gone.

Hecto drank in the words from the parchment. He fought with his passion to keep his voice low. "Incredible. Incredible! Where did she get these parchments? And how could she read them? Look, see these symbols? These are preservation sigils. These are the original writings from three thousand years ago. Wonderful!"

"That sounds nice."

"Better than nice." Too loud. He lowered his voice. "Better than nice. This is one of the greatest treasures lost to history. Even larger than the treasure of the Last King of Mariguez. Oh, yes. And it gets better--the treasure is said to hold..." He paused, then breathed the words as if they themselves were magic, "The Door of Khe."

"A door?"

Hecto intoned, as if entering a trance, "One of the most desired magical artifacts in the whole world. Perhaps not the most powerful, but imagine: a magical door the size of your hand, that you can open to any location you wish. When you step through, you are there. Then you can close the door, and it collapses back to the size of your hand. It may not summon armies of phantom warriors, or unleash powerful magic storms on your enemies, but imagine being able to step through a door to anywhere."

"That would save us a lot of time. We usually walk."

Hecto paused, lost in his thoughts. "It is dangerous, though. The door is not a kind artifact. It is always trying to trick the user and put them in danger."

"She's coming," Evascor said, as gently as his thundering voice permitted.

Hecto scrambled to shove the parchments back into the satchel. Moments later, Jhile returned.

"I believe I made it clear I needed a new drink," she said, laughing as she sat.

"Oh... ah... of course," Hecto said. He waved to the tavern lady.

***

The morning sun broke through the trees, the air crisp and clear. Hecto and Evascor had taken time for a pleasant breakfast of bacon, beans, and limestone, then had taken the western road out of the city.

Evascor spoke as the two walked. "Hecto, didn't you want to spend more time with Jhirle?"

"No. I mean, I would. But I believe she plans to go after the Bag of Unbounded Emptiness after all, and that spells trouble. I don't want to be anywhere near her when the Pratervine turns the town upside down looking for the thief."

"I thought she was going after the bigger treasure."

Hecto huffed. "If I know Jhirle," muttering, "and I think I do," more loudly, "she will try to grab every bit of loot she can before leaving the city. And the Bag of Unending Emptiness can hold a lot of loot. All of it, actually."

Evascor nodded, taking his long strides along Hecto's side.

"Besides," continued Hecto. "While she is distracted with that, I want to travel to the Door of Khe, in case that is her next goal."

"Get ahead of her?"

"Exactly, my good friend."

"Should we consult the Seer?"

Hecto smiled broadly. "No, Evascor, I know where it is." He waved a hand. "...roughly. The parchments told me what I needed to know." He broke out in a broad smile, imagining the treasure. "Maybe after we obtain it, we can step through the Door of Khe to the Seer's shop and show her the treasure."

At noon, they stopped for Hecto to eat. He found a log to sit on, and opened his traveling bag. Evascor sat in the middle of the road, taking in the forest sounds and the sunshine.

Hecto washed down a bite with a swig of water from his flask. "Don't you have a routine to practice today?"

Evascor shrugged. "Not today."

"That's odd. It's not often that--"

"Hecto, soldiers are coming." Evascor stood and pulled his giant longsword from where he kept it slung on his back. He walked into the road and took a battle stance, facing the city.

"I don't hear anything." He moved behind Evascor, trusting the giant's supernatural sight and hearing. He chewed on a bit of bread and roasted lamb while they waited.

Hecto finished eating, and put away the remainder of this food in his traveling bag. Then he returned to the road. Evascor stood in a ready position watching with his fierce eyes.

After a while, there came the distant beat of hoofbeats, and the clinking of armor. Then a troop of mercenary cavalry came into view. Seeing Evascor and Hecto, they spread out. They rode to encircle the travelers, readying spears and axes. Half of them carried light crossbows.

A tall man in chainmail, wearing a tunic with the emblem of Pratervine Mareste, rode forward. The mercenary captain's manner was clipped and direct. "You were in the city yesterday."

Hecto, behind Evascor, replied. "Yes, but we concluded our business and are traveling on to our next destination."

"Something very valuable has gone missing. Pratervine Mareste has requested everyone return to the city until we find it."

"It has nothing to do with us," Hecto said.

"All the same." He pointed to Evascor. "Put your weapon away, we're going to search you."

At that, a sharp bark of laughter came from the side of the road where Hecto's bag was. "Look at this gold!" A couple of mercenaries had dismounted. One was going through Hecto's things. He came up with a handful of shiny ancient coins. Another soldier called out with glee, finding another stash of coins in Evascor's oversized pack. "It's a blasted fortune."

The mercenary captain gave Evascor a hard look, then dismounted. "It's not coins we're looking for. Let me see." He stomped over to where some gold coins lay scattered on the ground. The mercenaries conferred, shooting murderous glances at Hecto and Evascor.

Hecto drew his sword and stood with his back to Evascor. He looked around the troop of men bristling with weapons and crossbows. "I don't think they mean to take us back to the city after all."

"I can defeat them, Hecto. There are only eighteen of them."

Hecto frowned. "Yes, but I don't know how I'll fare with all these crossbows. Unless they are all bad shots."

There came a squawk; Hecto turned to where the men had been rifling through his bag. There had been three men there. Now there were two.

One of the men turned to look into the underbrush, searching for his companion. Then he yelled as something grabbed his feet and lifted him into the air. He sailed toward the brush and vanished. His friend turned to run, but before he could reach the road, he flew up and backwards into the leaves and disappeared.

Chaos broke out. Without their captain, the men didn't know what to do. Many turned and shot their crossbows into the brush where the men had disappeared. Others dismounted to run right past Hecto and Evascor with weapons ready to confront whatever had taken their captain.

More men yelled as they flew through the air then vanished.

More crossbow bolts flew, but those disappeared, too.

Hecto couldn't see anything there, but Evascor rumbled, "Jhirle."

Jhirle emerged from the brush, in her brown and purple traveling clothes, holding open a leather bag decorated with intricate geometric designs of lines that danced and twirled around each other, all leading to the open mouth of the bag.

A soldier ran at Jhirle, bringing his axe down in a vicious swipe. She pointed the bag at him, and he lifted into the air, seeming to diminish and shrink before disappearing into it.

A soldier on horseback readied a spear and charged her, but she whirled and pointed the bag. The man and horse shrunk and spun, tumbling into the bag. She swept the bag over a rank of men, and they shrunk and tumbled, screaming, into the bag.

A soldier ran around Jhirle and rushed her flank, but Evascor stepped forward in a mighty lunge, grabbed a handful of chainmail, and tossed the man in front of Jhirle where he shrieked and tumbled into the bag.

Finally there was only one left, backing away while desperately working the winch on his crossbow. Jhirle leaped toward him, and laughed when he soared into the air, toppling ass over ears into the bag.

She closed the bag and grinned at a stunned Hecto.

"Well," she said. "Where are we headed next?"

"You took the bag," Evascor observed.

"The old fool practically had it out in the open. I don't know if I took it as much as stumbled upon it." Jhirle laughed.

Hecto shook his head. "I told you it would cause trouble."

"What trouble? It seems like another peaceful day in the woods." She picked up an axe from the ground and tossed it into the underbrush. "So, you two are certainly off for an early start. Where are you headed?" She arched an eyebrow at Hecto.

Hecto coughed. "Oh, on to the next town. We... um... wanted to get on the road in case there was trouble in the city."

"Great! I'll come with you." She smiled brightly.

"Oh, that's not necessary. We don't have anything particular we're looking for."

"Then we will wander together." She pointed a thumb over her shoulder. "I can't go back there anyway."

Hecto and Evascor glanced at each other. Hecto exhaled deeply. "Very well."

They walked until afternoon, at first catching up on their adventures and narrow escapse, eventually settling in to a comfortable silence, enjoying the crisp air alive with forest fragrances. They came to a bend in the road.

Hecto cleared his throat, and gazed into the heavy forest to the west, where it grew darker and denser, the trees taller and misshapen. Ominous noises sounded in the underbrush, and leaves rustled as unseen creatures scurried through them.

"Well, Evascor, how would you feel about taking an excursion into the Wilds? Perhaps we will find some lost ancient clue that leads us to our next treasure."

Evascor hesitated, then said, "OK."

"So, Jhirle, it has been a delight seeing you again. But this is where we must take our leave and bid you safe journeys."

Suspicion painted Jhirle's face. "What do you hope to find in the Wilds?"

"Oh, nothing. You know, just do some exploring."

They locked eyes, Hecto projecting innocence and Jhirle watching him intently.

"You looked in my satchel, didn't you?" Jhirle asked.

"A little." He shrugged.

Jhirle crowded him, meeting his gaze with fierce eyes. "Did you see what you needed?"

Hecto fell silent for a moment, then burst out with, "The lost treasure of Hasa Bun Khe, Jhirle! Lost for three thousand years! The Door of Khe!"

Jhirle sighed. "It doesn't matter. There's no way to get that treasure. I'm just here for the Bag of Unbounded Emptiness. Maybe I'll sell the parchments to a rich merchant as a curiosity."

"Wait... you're not pursuing the treasure? I don't understand."

"It's guarded by a pack of fearsome beasts. Terrible lizards twenty feet long, each with six legs and seven eyes. No one has been able to get past them--not in three thousand years."

"Why not?" asked Hecto. "Surely with the right magic..."

"The monsters cannot be defeated: their deadly breath turns men into stone."

"Turn into stone?" Hecto looked at Evascor, his stoney friend. Evascor met his gaze, and they blinked, barely suppressing the excitement bubbling up inside them.

Evascor broke into a wide smile, his fierce eyes sparkling. "Hecto, that's very good news. I am already stone."

Before the two could say anything more, Jhirle turned the Bag of Unbounded Emptiness upside down. Each time she shook it, a befuddled mercenary or dazed horse dropped ingloriously to the ground. The horses stumbled around, as if lost, and the men stared into space.

The captain of the mercenaries lay face down muttering, over and over, "My stars, it's full of nothing."

Jhirle smiled broadly and assured Hecto and Evascor, "They'll snap out of it in a day or two. Probably."

They left the road and broke into the forest, headed towards the Wilds.

***

At the end of the day, three days from the road, they approached a small rise. Evascor stepped up on a boulder for a better view. Hecto and Jhirle started a fire and prepared camp for the evening. Their travel through the Wilds was hard. Not only was the terrain rough and heavily forested, but they were under constant threat from the deadly denizens of the Wilds.

Evascor's sharp eyes and ears picked out roaming beasts and awful monsters they would have to avoid. He noticed that the way before them was becoming more dangerous, more rife with terrible creatures that could overwhelm their small party.

Wandering into the treeline, Evascor killed a meaty yanix in the forest, and brought it back to the flickering and crackling campfire.

"The Wilds are a dangerous place," Hecto said.

Jhirle betrayed only a hint of an eye roll. "Really."

Hecto continued, "Since the Last King of Mariguez gave up the throne and the kingdom collapsed, these lands have became a place of death and mystery, overrun by fearful creatures for eight hundred years"

Jhirle smiled at Evascor. "How do you like your kingdom, Your Majesty?"

The gray giant paused for a moment, considering. Then he shrugged. He searched through his oversized pack and retrieved a bag of pebbles.

Hecto had skinned the yanix and prepared to roast it over the fire. He said, "I saved a surprise for tonight." From his traveling bag he brought exotic spices, which charged the meat with a firey, sweet scent.

"Ooh, gingerdat and nullit." Jhirle smelled the luxurious scent deeply. "I haven't tasted those in a long time."

After it cooked, Hecto took the meat from the fire. He smiled and handed her plate with a juicy cut. "Enjoy," he said.

They sat together on a log in front of the campfire, eating quietly.

Hecto chuckled. "You stayed in Theadin too long."

"Why do you say that?"

Evascor reached into his bag popped a few pebbles into his mouth.

Hecto glanced at Jhirle. "You've adopted their manners in eating." A gentle smile. "The way you hold your knife."

She stiffened. "What do you mean?"

"Oh, nothing. Just..."

Evascor crunched his pebbles.

Jhirle's voice rose with intensity. "Do you mean I lack manners? That I'm some street urchin from 'Thieve's Den'?"

"No, no, I was just saying--"

Her lips were tight. "I'm from Theadin. My father was a craftsman there."

"Oh, I didn't know that. I'm terribly sorry."

She turned her attention to her meat, cutting off a bite. "At least I can go back home whenever I like."

Now Hecto stiffened. "Wait, what does that mean?"

"Nothing." She chewed innocently.

A small tremor shook the clearing. Evascor leaned forward. "Hecto, we should--"

"Do you mean home to Alevely? You know full well why I can't go back."

She took a bite of meat and shrugged.

"And I told you, that was for love. I would do it all again."

She muttered something.

"What was that?" Hecto asked loudly.

She responded loudly, "What do you know of love?"

The campfire crackled, and a log tipped over. Evascor said, as gently as his powerful voice allowed, "We should be quiet so we don't attract--"

Hecto put his plate down and stood. "You have no idea what I gave up for--"

Jhirle stood and met his gaze, here eyes fierce. "Oh you talk about love, but what do you know? All you do is run around looking for your silly treasures!"

"Silly treasures!" barked Hecto. "I suppose the Ruby of Mariguez is silly."

"Well, what have you done with it? Here we are out in the middle of nowhere eating by a campfire--"

"I have plans," Hecto exclaimed.

A larger tremor. Evscor said, "Hecto--"

From the forest came a thunderous crashing, and the three companions froze. A giant gray head, with long spikes protruding from crown to jaw, poked out of the trees. The creature's eyes were pools of black. It's hunched shoulders, also bristling with gleaming spikes, raised even over Evascor. It stepped forward on front legs armed with bony serrated ridges. It opened its fanged mouth and snarled.

Evascor walked toward the beast. "Listen, foul creature. I am King Evascor of Mariguez, and these travelers are under my protection. Turn away now and I will spare your life."

The creature braced itself to charge, its eyes burning into the stoney giant.

Evascor stomped one foot forward, and placed a hand on the hilt of the longsword slung on his back.

The insects of the forest stopped their singing, and all fell into deadly silence except for the crackling of the campfire.

The giant beast lowered its head. It turned slowly, and crashed back through the forest in the direction it came.

Hecto spoke to Jhirle in a hushed voice. "I suppose we should get our sleep."

Jhirle nodded, and whispered. "Yes, I think that's best."

Hecto gave Jhirle a long look, then said, "Jhirle..."

"Yes?"

He sighed. "Good night."

"Good night."

***

Evascor kept an ever-watchful eye out for unspeakable dangers, as their trip took many more days. They finally reached the foothills of the mountain range that bordered the Wilds to the South. The three travelers came to stand on a rocky ridge overlooking a lost valley stretching out before them.

The gray giant pointed and said, "Look, there it is."

Jhirle stepped to stand close beside Hecto. Their sleeves touched, but neither pulled away. The three of them gazed at the lush valley. Far below them, ruins peeked from the forest and glinted in the late afternoon sun where the tomb of Hasa Bun Khe lay with its fantastic treasure.

Jhirle said, "I can barely make it out, but I can see some stone structures and ruined towers. Hecto, how did you know it would be here?"

"Evascor and I have spent enough time in the Wilds that I recognized the area from its description. Although we've never been this far South. It was just a matter of narrowing down the exact location."

Evascor nodded. "It's nice we found it on the first try. We usually don't."

Jhirle said, "For three thousand years, no human has set foot in this valley and come out alive." She took Evascor's stoney arm. "Here we go."

They took another two days to cross the rich forest of the valley and approach the tomb of Hasa Bun Khe. They camped outside, in a clearing across from the giant front gate of the tomb complex. It was like a maze, with high sandstone walls towering even over Evascor.

"It's quiet," Hecto said.

Jhirle cautioned him. "Don't be fooled. The guardians must be slumbering. Best we let them sleep a while longer."

They slept, and the next day, they waited until the sun was high in the sky when it shone straight down into the compound for maximum light.

"Hecto, let Evascor go. Stay behind so you don't get turned into stone," Jhirle said, taking his arm.

Hecto bravely surveyed the tomb complex. "No, I have to accompany him. He can fight the lizards while I follow at a safe distance, but I must help him navigate the maze to its center, where lies the treasure room."

"It's too dangerous!"

"This is not the first maze I've traversed," Hecto said, smiling.

Jhirle approached him, her eyes wide. She reached out and seized the front of his red jacket. "Then please be careful. I want to see you inside."

Hecto gazed into her upturned face, catching his breath. "I will."

"After we find the treasure, you might find another treasure tonight." A coy smile and a wink.

She stood on tiptoes, her lips reaching for his. He leaned down, enveloping her in his arms. Their lips met, and the world disappeared--the tomb complex, the treasure, the dangers of the wild all dissolved into a pool of weightless wonder. Hecto brought a hand up to touch her cheek, and she pulled him even closer to her.

Evascor's voice rumbled as gently as he could manage. "We should probably go soon."

Jhirle stepped back, still holding his jacket. "Be careful."

Hecto walked backwards toward the giant gate, watching her. "Don't be afraid for me. I will see you again very soon."

Jhirle said, "Call out when it's safe, and I'll come to you."

She waved to Hecto and Evascor as they eased through the giant gateway.

Evascor held his longsword ready, Hecto trailing behind him. They came to a corner, and turned. "Nothing," Evascor said. "I still don't hear anything."

"They must be here," Hecto said.

"Hecto, I think Jhirle was right. You should stay back while I kill the lizards."

"You know you'll get lost." The young man glanced wistfully toward the entrance. In a hushed voice, he said, "Besides, it's important you and I reach the treasure room first."

"Why? I thought you trusted Jhirle. At least back there."

"Oh, I trust her! I trust her to take as much loot as she can shove in her pockets. And she can have it. I don't care about the gold and jewels. She is welcome to all the rest--I want to hold the Door of Khe before she can get to it."

Evascor spoke, still easing forward, his sword before him. "I thought you liked her."

"I... do. I'll just like her a lot better when I have the Door in my hand."

Evascor nodded.

Suddenly, from behind them came a hideous roar. It was the sound of something huge and deadly. It reverberated through the passageways, echoing through the tomb complex. Upset dust sprinkled down from atop the walls.

"This way!" Evascor called. He ran toward the sound. Hecto followed.

Then came another roar, even louder and more ferocious than the first. Hecto ran into Evascor's back. "Another one!" he cried. He knew he had to stay behind the stoney giant to avoid the lethal breath of the deadly lizards.

"Follow me!" cried Evascor. He charged down a passageway, then turned a corner, searching for the monster.

Another roar came from behind them. "They have us surrounded!" Hecto cried.

"Don't worry," Evascor said. "I can hear where they're coming from."

Evascor raised his giant sword and ran around a corner, prepared for a death-dealing slash. The corridor was empty.

Another roar sounded to their right. Hecto turned in a panic. "Evascor, where are they coming from? There are too many of them."

Evascor ran back the way they'd come, then dashed around another corner.

A new roar sounded, the echoes reverberating through the compound.

Terrified, Hecto drew his own sword, and backed up toward Evascor. "We have to stop them! They're all over the compound!"

The two stood, back-to-back, waiting for the onslaught of terrifying, death-breathing lizards.

Hecto choked out a sob. "Blazes! I can't believe this is my final adventure. They're all around us. I'll be turned to stone in this awful place."

The deafening roars and shrieks battered them from all directions.

"Hecto," Evascor said. "They're not moving."

"What?"

Evascor lowered his sword. He strode toward the sound of the closest roaring. Halfway down the corridor, with the bright sun shining down, something sparkled on the ground. He picked it up.

The closest roaring abruptly stopped.

Evascor handed the object to Hecto. It was a small clay lizard, embedded with little bits of metal that reflected the sunlight like shiny little mirrors.

Hecto's terror abated, but his heart sank.

The adventurers trotted down corridors. One by one, where they found terrifying roaring sat a small clay lizard, sparkling with bright pieces of metal.

When they had thirteen of them, the corridors were once again silent.

"A baker's dozen," Hecto said. "She must have bought them on sale."

***

Their hearts heavy as ships' anchors, the two navigated the maze until they stood before a giant double door twice as tall as Evascor. An elaborate mosaic decorated it, showing the might and glory of Hasa Bun Khe at the height of the kingdom's power: The expansive city; powerful enemies vanquished; trade ships full of rare and exotic goods sailing to all parts of the world; magics that had not been seen for thousands of years. A fierce, raging kingdom that swept over the land like the onslaught of a typhoon.

They walked with hearts of lead and feet of clay. Evascor reached forward with his rocky hands and pushed the doors open.

Inside was a treasure hall such as Hecto and Evascor had never seen, even in all their adventures together in the Wilds. A vast room with cream-colored walls. Empty pedestals scattered the space. A broad ledge jutting out across the width of the room that carried only scuff marks and discolorations from the passage of time. Shelf upon empty shelf. Spaces where priceless magical armor could have stood. Nooks in the wall with room for busts of great nobles adorned with unimaginably valuable jewelry. Patches on the floor free of dust where piles of gold, silver, and electrum coins must have been poured, where brilliant gems of every color would have been piled on top of them.

Hecto shuffled forward. He let out a grunt little of anguish as he read the message written in the thick dust.

"The Door of Khe was here" with an arrow pointing to an empty spot on the floor.

***

Evascor had brought a fat basheen carcass from the forest, and it was now roasting over a campfire. Its rich smell wafted through the clearing in front of the lost tomb. The crackling of flames filled the air, and warm light lit the over-sized gate. Exotic spices of gadis and curric enriched the scent, making it tantalizing to anyone who could smell the enticing aroma. That was exactly one person: Hecto Safan.

Evascor came into the light of the campfire with an armful of chunks he'd broken off from the sandstone walls.

"Are they good?" asked Hecto sullenly.

Evascor nodded and sat down heavily. He dropped the stones on the ground. He selected one and bit into it. "Delicious."

"I suppose that's some consolation," Hecto muttered.

"Where do you think she went?" asked Evascor.

"Who knows? Obviously through the Door of Khe. The only reason she wanted the Bag of Unbounded Emptiness was to suck up all the treasure."

Evascor said, "It was a funny accident we met her in the city."

"Oh, it was no accident. She followed us there. Likely she paid those ruffians to drag her into the alley so we'd come to her aid."

"But Hecto, why did she lie to us? There weren't any lizards who's breath turned men into stone. There weren't any guardians at all."

"It was bait, Evascor. And we took it like a couple of big fish."

"Oh." The two companions were thoughtful in the warm light of the campfire. "But why did she need us at all?"

Hecto exhaled deeply. "Because she couldn't read the parchments. They were written in the ancient language of Khe. Knowing they held the secret, she stole them for that reason. But she did not know what the secret was. She needed me to read them to find this place." He buried his face in his hands.

Evascor said, "Don't feel bad, Hecto. At least we..."

His thundering voice trailed off, his fierce face thoughtful. The campfire crackled and popped cheerfully in the cool night air.

----

Any seasoned treasure hunter knows too well that the greatest challenge isn’t obtaining the treasure, but finding it in the first place. Even when you know exactly where it’s supposed to be.

“It’s here, Sheriff Gnox, it’s right here!” Hecto Safan paced back and forth in the shade of a giant oak tree just off the main road, just outside the quaint country village of Idger. The day was bursting with the beauty of early autumn, with a single lazy cloud floating idly by. The leaves of the trees were just starting to turn. Some crows called out in contented caw caw caws, happy with the state of the world. Far from the danger of the Wilds, Idger was a picture of serenity and calm.

Hecto was a tall, powerful-looking young man, his face darkened with frustration. He dressed in fine red traveling clothes. Their quality suggested he had recently come into money and spent more on his garments than he needed to.

“Right here?” Sheriff Gnox’s mustache twitched. “And how did this treasure get here? There’s nothing but farmland around the village. Young man, you’re chasing shadows.” The sheriff squinted at Hecto. “Why do you want this treasure anyway? What do you need it for?”

Hecto, unable to find words to reply, just looked at the sheriff incredulously.

The sheriff was a tall older man with wide shoulders and a bushy mustache, wearing a steel breastplate. He eyed Hecto warily, his hand resting on the hilt of his sword.

Behind the sheriff stood a foot soldier with a heavy helmet covering his face. His poleaxe looked extra tall compared to his short stature.

At that moment, a gigantic figure came crashing through the trees -- a gray creature in the shape of a man eight or nine feet tall, made of rock and iron. A face of hardened stone looked at Hecto and the sheriff with dark eyes. Intricate curves of shining metal highlighted the creature’s features. Thick chains wrapped his enormous chest, securing a blackened steel box to his breast.

The giant regarded the Hecto and the sherriff for a long moment. Then he brought a brown rock to its mouth and took a huge bite.

The creature turned to Hecto and spoke with a voice that rolled in like a sudden thunderstorm. “These brown rocks are truly delicious, Hecto. I brought you an apple.” The stoney giant had an armload of brown rocks with a single red apple perched on top.

Hecto took the apple from the pile and bit into it. He spotted the sheriff’s nervous expression. “Oh, don’t worry, Sheriff! This is my companion.” He placed a hand on the giant’s rocky arm. “Evascor, this is Sheriff Gnox. Sheriff Gnox, this is Evascor, King of Mariguez.”

“King?” Gnox’s mustache twitched again.

Hecto waved a hand. “Um, yeah, we’re still working on that. At any rate, the treasure is here. The Seer told me clearly.”

Evascor, the footsoldier and the sheriff all squinted skeptically.

Evascor said, “Clearly?”

Hecto walked out into the sun. “As clear as the sun is today. Look: tree, road, crows. This shadow here. There’s no doubt, this is where the treasure is.”

Gnox, his footsoldier, and Evascor looked around the clearing and failed to detect any sign of treasure.

Hecto peered at the treeline. “Are there any barrow mounds or abandoned keeps we’re not seeing?”

“No,” said the sheriff. “Just farms.”

Evascor looked at the sky and said, “Fourth seventh.” He dropped his armload of brown rocks and reached behind his back to where he’d slung his giant longsword. He moved away from the three men, paused for a moment, then started his routine: rush and swing in a high arc to take out an imaginary horseman.

Hecto said to the sheriff, “He does this seven times a day.”

“Sure. Well, like I said, this county is very quiet. Always has been. To be honest, that's why I came here after the wars.”

The stoney giant dashed to the right, body slamming a second horseman. He reached up and pulled the imaginary rider to the ground.

Hecto grew excited again. “The treasure we seek is a powerful magical artifact. It makes an entire army invulnerable to physical harm for a day, once a week.”

Gnox eyed him skeptically.

Evascor crushed the invisible opponent with his pommel. Then he leaped up, reaching out with his longsword to skewer the third assailant.

The young man in red continued. “Imagine that! A king with an unkillable army. The artifact is a small device you can carry in your hands. It takes the form of a golden pine cone with a bejeweled snake wrapped around it.”

The sheriff raised his eyebrows. In a flat tone, he said, “Golden pine cone. Bejeweled snake.”

Evascor dodged nimbly back, then forth, then back again. He leaped forward and grasped a phantasmal foe, spinning him around. Then he raised his longsword with one hand and brought it down in a devastating blow. It would have annihilated any man standing there.

Gnox narrowed his eyes. “I’ve seen a lot in my life. A great number of things you would not believe. But a magical golden pine cone? Sounds like a fairy tale.”

Evascor made a few closing flourishes, then slung the enormous longsword on his back. The rocky giant walked over to the men.

“You’re pretty good,” Gnox said.

Evascor spoke with his rumbling voice. “I like this routine. It is for five opponents.”

Hecto laughed. “Only five?”

“Well, they are very powerful. Timing is critical. The problem is, I don’t understand the end of this routine. Usually, the routines end with all the opponents dead. But for this one, the commentary is different.” He shook his head, puzzled. “I haven’t figured it out.”

The sheriff took that in, considered a reply, then turned to Hecto instead. “I haven’t seen any golden pine cones or jeweled snakes. I would remember that. But my traveling days are long past. You might go over to Baron Vass’s manor house and see if he has an idea. I’m going back to the village.” He paused. He gave the younger man a stern look. “And I don’t mind you hunting treasure, but this is a peaceful county. Let’s keep it that way.”

Hecto nodded.

It was just a short walk to the village Idger in the pleasant sun and fragrant country air. Hecto took that opportunity to speak to the small party animatedly while the others listened, having no choice in the matter. “Several scrolls tell stories of the artifact.”

Sheriff Gnox, walking beside him with a faint limp, asked, “Does this treasure have a name?”

“It has many names!” Hecto brightened. He drew a large breath and opened his mouth to name them.

Gnox flinched and hurriedly backtracked before Hecto could start iterating them. “Er, why don’t you tell me one of the stories?”

Hecto swept his hands in the air. “Only a couple centuries ago, a huge horde descended on a kingdom, intent on wiping it out. The king and one thousand of his bravest warriors stood at a ford the invaders needed to cross. They were desperate to hold off the horde long enough for the rest of his people to escape to safety. They used the golden pine cone and snake -- to their amazement, they held off the invaders for the whole day. They killed thousands but did not lose a single man.”

The group came to the village. People came from the village’s meager buildings to stare at the man dressed in red and his giant rocky companion.

Hecto said, “The king knew the enchantment would end at dawn. So that night, he and his 1000 men ran into the enormous camp of the enemy.”

The sheriff scoffed. “And they were cut to pieces.”

“No,” Hecto said. “The king ordered them to scatter, and ignore the defenders. They ran as fast as they could, with no armor and only their swords, dodging nimbly through a thicket of deadly spears and axes. They searched the giant camp for the invading king. His tent was easy to find, being the largest and most well-lit.”

Gnox grunted. “Of course.”

“They ran into the tent, ignoring the spears, swords, and axes that assailed them, and seized the king. They dragged him out screaming before his army and demanded he surrender or die. He chose ‘surrender,’ and that was the end of the war.”

The sheriff squinted and looked off in the distance. “Fairy tale,” he declared. “I led an army to topple a very evil ruler once, and it took the sacrifice of many, many brave men. I don’t believe there’s some magical golden pine cone that could have replaced their bravery.”

More villagers came into the street to watch them. Among them was a burly man with a blacksmith’s hammer in his hand. A woodcutter with a large axe came and stood beside him.

The small party stopped in the middle of the village, with its squat wooden buildings and pens containing livestock.

The sheriff pointed. “That is Baron Vass’s manor out there. Maybe he can help you find your pine cone. But don’t get your hopes up.”

Hecto bowed to the sheriff. “Thank you, sir. When we come upon the treasure, you will have our many thanks.”

The sheriff shrugged. “I still don’t understand why you need this treasure so much. What are you going to do with it?”

Evascor, in his rumbling voice, said, “He just likes to have them.”

Hecto started to protest when a cry rang out behind them. A man rode in from the direction they’d walked. His stallion’s head hung low, breathing sharp pants of hot breath, sweat dripping down its sides. Its ears twitched and swiveled with fear.

The rider’s armor was blackened as if from a great heat, with pieces of armor missing entirely. Blood caked his forlorn face. The rider slumped lower and lower as he approached. Sheriff Gnox rushed forward to catch the man as he slid off the horse. He lowered the man to the ground. Blood covered the sheriff’s hands and breastplate.

The man gasped for air and spoke a single word, “Vlang!”

The crowd around the man drew back as if a bomb had gone off, and the sheriff’s face darkened. Gnox braced the man up. “What do you mean, ‘Vlang’? We locked that miserable vermin in the king’s dungeon ten years ago.”

The wounded man shook his head. “Free. With companions. Destroyed…” The man drew a shuddering breath. “Destroyed Blackenshire town. Killed everyone who could not get away.”

“How many men did Vlang have?”

The man’s eyes widened, “Vlang and four others.”

The sheriff frowned deeply. “That is not good. If Vlang traveled with only a few companions, they must be very powerful.”

The wounded man gripped Gnox’s arm. “He said he was coming for you.”

Evascor stepped forward and lifted the man like a doll. Gnox looked startled, then pointed to the healer’s surgery. The stoney giant stooped as he carried the man through the door. Bolan, the healer, stepped from the gathered village folk and ran alongside the giant. He scrambled inside his surgery to clear the clutter from his table. Evascor laid the man there.

Bolan hesitated. Gnox’s expression became fierce. “What are you waiting for? He needs help!”

The healer, pale and shaking, said, “If Vlang did this, I don’t want to…”

Gnox’s face turned red. “If Vlang did this, it won’t make any difference if you help this man. If we don’t stop Vlang, he will destroy this village and everyone in it. Including you!”

The sheriff turned away sharply from the trembling healer, and stepped out of the shop to face the dozen or so villagers gathered there. He looked out at them, and saw the fear etched in their faces.

“You’ve all seen this, and know that Vlang is coming. This village is in grave peril. We need to assemble into a force and meet him and his companions. He only has a small party, so if we meet them in force, we should be able to stop him.”

Tors the blacksmith spoke in a gruff voice. “Talk to the baron. He is charged with protecting these lands.”

“I will. But we also need to assemble the men of the village.”

The crowd before him murmured. Saiph the woodcutter spoke. “I am happy to lend my axe against a troop of invaders. But to stand against Vlag is madness.”

Gnox scowled. “I defeated him ten years ago.”

Saiph the woodcutter protested. “And you had ten thousand men with you.”

Tors said, “No, sheriff, I’m sorry but this is a military matter to take up with the baron.” The men in the crowd shifted uneasily.

Orgal the innkeeper spoke next. “I’ll be gathering my family and going to the countryside until they have passed. It’s too dangerous.”

The sheriff glowered, but it was no use. The men shuffled off to make preparations to flee the village.

The burly blacksmith turned, and he exchanged a hard look with the sheriff. Tors opened his mouth to speak, as if he wished he could offer something, maybe some solace to the sheriff. Then he hung his head, walking back to his smithy.

Hecto looked to Evascor, and the giant regarded him back. But there was nothing to say.

The sheriff scowled, watching the villagers drift away. But there was a hardness to his gaze, and a hint of resignation. “All right, let’s go talk to the baron. He’ll need to know of this threat. You wanted to talk with him anyway.”

The sheriff, his footsoldier, Hecto and Evascor started the walk to the baron’s manor.

Hecto watched the sheriff’s dark expression, his jaw clenching and unclenching. Hecto said, “You have a history with Vlang?”

Gnox nodded. “I led the army that captured the sorcerer ten years ago. It was brutal. We outnumbered his force ten to one, but still suffered terrible losses.” He paused, his face tight with the pain of remembering. “He let loose terrible magic lightning and killed hundreds of my men before we even reached the outer walls of his keep. Vlang is very dangerous. I understand how he could destroy an entire town with just a small force of men.”

Evascor rumbled, a troubled expression on his stoney face.

They arrived at the manor. A heavy man wearing a leather apron, his hands and face covered with dirt came from across the courtyard. He smiled broadly, but his face grew serious as he approached the sheriff.

“Good afternoon, Sheriff,” said the man.

“Good afternoon, Baron.”

Baron Vass wiped dirt from his hands and regarded the sheriff. “What brings you to the manor? By your dark expression, I don’t suppose we found a new goldmine outside of town.”

Gnox informed him of the situation.

The baron shook his head. “I only have twenty men, and four of them are laid up from that tussle we had with that troll last week. There’s only one thing to do. We must clear the village out, and move everyone to the countryside until Vlang has passed.”

Gnox shook his head. “The man who came said Vlang is looking for me. He’ll destroy the town, the fields, and this manor, too, unless he finds me.”

The baron looked off into the distance. “Faith! Why didn’t the king kill just him ten years ago?”

“He must have had some use. Perhaps information the kingdom needed.”

“Who are these two? Can they help?”

“Treasure hunters,” Gnox said. “We can’t involve them in this.”

Hecto smiled and shrugged apologetically. “My sword is sharp, but I don’t have the armor or training to fight off an experienced force of attackers.”

The baron pulled a hand down his face, smearing even more dirt on it. “I’m sorry, sheriff. I don’t have much of a fighting force. The people of this county are farmers. We’re so far from the frontier. Even my soldiers are …” He trailed off. “I’ll have to stay here and protect the manor and the crops as best we can.” He looked at the sheriff with deep regret. “You better get the villagers to safety, and then ….” He gave Gnox a serious look. “... good luck to you.”

Sheriff Gnox looked away, scowling, but then nodded.

Hecto started to speak, to ask about the treasure he sought, but Evascor reached out and put a giant gray hand on his shoulder. The young man fell silent.

The sun was setting as Gnox and the others got back to the village. The sheriff brought them to his house and invited them inside. His housekeeper, Dalhrae, had prepared a meal, but hurried to prepare an extra plate for Hecto.

Dalhrae asked, “...and King Evascore?”

Hecto shook his head. “He only eats rocks.”

The big stoney creature sat on the floor next to the table.

Gnox turned to his footsoldier and said, “Fahnon, take off that armor and come join us.”

Gnox’s footsoldier took off his helmet and his scaled armor, revealing a boy of about fourteen years old. He sat down next to the sheriff, and the housekeeper set a plate in front of him. “Thanks, mom,” the boy said.

“It’s too bad we didn’t locate the treasure,” Hecto said. He tore off a chunk of bread. “With its magic of invincibility, we could easily defeat Vlang, regardless of the power of his men.”

Gnox drew a heavy breath.

After dinner, Gnox summoned Dalhrae and Fahnon. “Look, tomorrow is going to be very rough. I want you to gather your things tonight, and find some of the other villagers who are leaving. Go with them for a few days until Vlang has left. Then….” He paused. Silence deepened in the room. “Then you can all come back and begin rebuilding the village from what’s left.”

The boy spoke, “What about you, sheriff?”

Gnox smiled grimly, a twinkle returning to his eyes. “My leg may be stiff, but I’ve cut down a dozen cowardly villains with this sword. Some of them ten times as dangerous as Vlang. I defeated him once, I’ll defeat him again.”

Fahnon smiled, but behind him, tears welled in his mother’s eyes.

Daybreak found the sheriff standing beneath the tall oak tree where he had been talking with Hecto the day before. Hecto approached him.

“Sheriff, in our travels, we’ve come across some powerful artifacts of our own. Take this sword -- it cuts through steel like butter. And this shield has protection runes crafted into it. It deflects any magic thrown at it.”

Gnox regarded the sword and shield Hecto offered. “No. I know the heft of my own sword, and …”

Hecto said, “Please, let us help you at least this much.”

The sheriff considered, then nodded and took the enchanted sword and shield.

The morning advanced. Evascor ran through his routine. Swing. Bash. Lunge. Grasp. Chop. A little later, he ran through it again. Not long after, Evascor turned and focused his gaze down the road.

Gnox asked, “Does your friend see something?”

Hecto said, “Evascor has very sharp eyes. It’s helpful for guarding a great treasure.”

Evascor said, his voice like low thunder, “I see a wagon and two horsemen. Does Vlang wear a black robe embroidered with crimson?”

Gnox nodded. “He used to. Why?”

“Vlang is coming.”

Behind them, a horse neighed. Gnox and the others turned to see the baron approaching, mounted on a fine steed. He wore full armor, and a small troop of armored men followed behind him.

“Sheriff,” said the baron, “tell us where you would like us to assemble.”

Crashing came from the trees. Tors the blacksmith stepped forward from a forest path, a heavy hammer in his hands. The other villagers followed the broad-shouldered man. “And us, too. Fahnon here talked sense into us. This is our home, and we can’t leave you to fight here by yourself.”

With them was the young footsoldier Fahnon, in his scale armor, bearing his gigantic pole axe.

Gnox regarded the small force with a stern expression. “This is going to be very hard.”

The baron said, “Then we’ll make it rough for Vlang, too. You defeated him once, you’ll do it again. Nice sword and shield, by the way.”

Gnox got them in order. The armored foot soldiers stood in the center. The lightly armed villagers took either flank. He gave them instructions about how to best face the small party of men advancing on them.

He knelt and addressed his young footsoldier. “Now, Fahnon, you go and protect your mother.”

The boy started to protest.

Gnox shushed him. “She is going to need your help if we are not successful. It falls on you to protect the village now. I … want to thank you. It has been a pleasure being in the field with you.”

The boy hesitated, then nodded and turned to leave, but when he reached the treeline he hid behind a bush, peeking out.

The men faced forward with grim expressions. It wasn’t long before the wagon and two horsemen approached.

Hecto gripped the sheriff’s arm. “Good luck to you all,” he said. He stepped out of the road, away from the troop, to where Evascor stood. The stoney giant rumbled uneasily.

At shouting distance, Vlang stopped the wagon and climbed down. As did the armored man sitting next to him. A maceman with a heavy black breastplate jumped off the back. He put a heavy black helmet on his head and adjusted it. The two horsemen drew their swords and regarded the troop in front of them with amusement.

Their weapons shined and sparkled in the sun with magical intensity.

Vlang gathered his black robe and stepped forward. “General Gnox!” he shouted. "There you are. With a mighty army. I am grateful! I thought we would have to hunt you down.”

Gnox thundered back, “I would never cower from vermin like you, Vlang. No mercy for you this time. You will not rot in a dungeon again -- we’ll throw your bones a beggar’s grave.”

Vlang laughed cheerfully. “Mighty words from the mighty General Gnox! Your peasants are no match for us. These men freed me from the king’s hospitality, and we go to join the Blood Emperor in the South to deliver powerful artifact. His glorious armies will be unstoppable. All you’re doing is delaying our supper.”

Fury blazed in Gnox’s eyes. “We will yield to no tyrant like you. I defeated you before, and I will again.”

“The Blood Emperor will unite these lands and bring untold wealth to all who join him. Except… none of you. You will not live to see the sun set.”

Gnox raised his shimmering sword. "We will never bow to your false emperor. Men, prepare for battle! Let us show these cowards the strength of our hearts and the steel of our blades!"

The sorcerer in black and crimson turned to speak to his companions. “That miserable fool caused me to rot in a dungeon for ten years. Ten years! I ate rats to stay alive. Kill the rest, but don’t harm him. I want him to writhe and suffer before I burn the life out of him, and watch him die with my own eyes.”

His companions nodded, and started limbering up, approaching the troop facing them.

Gnox looked to his men and called out “Ready yourselves!” The defenders raised what weapons they carried, whether steel or makeshift. Their faces set in fierce determination.

Evascor stepped into the road.

“Stop!” His rumbling voice came like a sudden thunderstorm and shook the trees. “The sheriff and these good villagers defending their land is an act of nobility. Vlang, today your evil ends. I am King Evascor of Mariguez and I will guard these people!”

Hecto shrugged, then stepped up to Gnox. “He’s very good at guarding things.”

Gnox looked at Hecto with an astonished expression. “Why is he doing this?”

“I honestly don’t know. He likes guarding things. But there are only five of them, it shouldn’t take long.”

Vlang threw his head back and laughed. “King of Mariguez? King? Mariguez? The kingdom that’s been dead for centuries? Are you serious? I don’t know what kind of deluded monster you are...” He exchanged a mirthful look with his companions. “... but if you want to end your miserable existence here on this road, so be it.”

The sorcerer made a gesture, and his men bore down on Evascor.

The stoney giant ran forward as the horsemen closed on him. A huge step and a high swing took off the rider’s arm and cleaved straight through his body. Evascor leapt and body-slammed the second horseman to his right. He reached up, grabbing the rider and ramming him to the ground. He brought his pommel down three times, crushing the man’s chest. The gray giant leapt up to rush the mace wielder. The heavy mace swung, but the giant longsword had better reach and went right through the warrior’s armor and chest.

Vlang barely had time to clasp his hands together and bring forth a terrible stream of lightning. Evascor danced to the side, dodging the twisting bolt. He leapt to the other side and dodged as it swept back. On the third leap he lunged forward and grabbed Vlang’s arm with one hand and swung the sorcerer around. The lightning swept across the field and struck the remaining foe. The warrior screamed and burst into flames.

Evascor raised his longsword one-handed, still holding Vlang’s arm. He brought it down and cleaved the sorcerer in two.

Stillness fell over the battlefield. The troop behind Evascor stood in stunned silence. The stoney giant regarded the fallen villains.

All the men standing in the road exhaled as one.

Sheriff Gnox's mustache twitched as he surveyed the battlefield. "Did he just...?"

Hecto leaned over to Gnox, winking. “Like I said, he’s very good at—” but froze.

The villains came to their feet. Vlang laughed sadistically as he watched the expression on Evascor's face.

Evascor counted on his fingers, ticking off the moves. He shook his head, unsure where he had gone wrong.

But there was no time. The first swordsman, now on foot, raced at him. Evascor swung his huge sword in an arc, and sliced through the man at shoulder level. But the swordsman took a bite of the gray giant, his enchanted sword knocking a chunk off his chest.

Evascor jumped sideways, ramming the second assailant and knocking him to the ground. The gray giant brought his pommel down, crushing the warrior’s chest. But the man brought his burning sword up and drove it into Evascor’s rocky side. Evascor flipped his sword down and drove the point into the warrior for good measure.

He jumped up to meet the mace man, but his timing was off. The warrior was too close, and slammed the mace into Evascor’s shoulder. Large chips of rock flew everywhere. Evascor improvised and dove at the man, lifting him on his damaged shoulder. He stepped back, swinging hard, hitting the warrior in mid-air. The mace man spun head over tail with a spiral of crimson and landed 15 yards away. But the stoney giant was hurting.

Vlang clasped his hands together and hit Evascor directly with blazing lightning. Evascor shielded himself with one hand and struggled to get closer. The last warrior rushed in, but the gray giant drove his sword through the man’s guard and into his chest. Lightning coursed down the metal inside the gray giant and through his sword. The skewered foe burst into flames. The force of the blast caused Evascor to drop his blade.

Evascor pushed toward Vlang, and reached out to grab the sorcerer’s clasped hands. He brought his rocky fist down on Vlang as a granite-headed hammer, over and over, until the lightning stopped.

Vlang lay still. Evascor stood over him. The giant’s left arm cracked and fell to the ground. He regarded his detached arm. He reached down with his good hand and retrieved his enormous longsword.

Vlang and his companions rose. They raised their weapons and stood at the ready. The sorcerer shook with laughter.

“King Evascor,” he said, with sneering mockery, “you are a powerful creature. But you see, you can’t defeat us. We will continue to rise and tear you down until you are no more than mystical gravel. Do you see now the terrible power we will deliver to the Blood Emperor? The entire world will fall to his might.”

Vlang absently raised a hand and toyed with a device on a heavy chain around his neck, partly hidden in his robes -- a golden pine cone, with a bejeweled snake twisted around it.

Evascor let go of his sword. Even before it hit the ground, the gray hand reached out in a blur to grasp the golden pine cone. He ripped it from Vlang’s grip, breaking the chain and Vlang’s neck in one powerful sweep.

Without the device’s magic protecting them from their wounds, Vlang and his companions exploded into fountains of blood and body parts.

Evascor turned excitedly.

The entire troop spanning the road stood frozen. Faces pale, some with mouths agape, some with lips in tight lines, regarded the scene around Evascor. Sheriff Gnox stared, the blood drained from his face. Down the line, a spear fell and clattered noisily on the ground. A man broke from the line and ran to the treeline to empty his belly of breakfast. Hecto held his shining sword half-drawn, his face fixed in a stunned expression.

Evascor held up the device. “Hecto, look! I found your treasure!

----

“Peejee, wake up! Wake up! Your guardian has gone crazy!”

Crazy? What does that mean, crazy? Her roommate, leaning over her, seeing she was awake, jumped up and ran out of the room. Peejee pushed herself up, struggled to pull on her tunic, and rushed out.

She ran toward the public square outside the guardian workshops. A small crowd had formed, mostly of artisans and merchants, but also passers-by stopping to see the spectacle. Peejee shouldered her way through the crowd, drawing protests. She was buffeted by rough cloth and the thick smells of spicy, earthy, morning che. She burst from the crowd.

Evascor, her apprentice project, was holding a flashing great sword in both hands, going through some sort of martial routine right in the middle of the public square.

Where did he get a sword? Why did he need a sword?

He was a towering, powerful figure, crafted of stone interlaced with swirls of metal. The ornate designs glinting in the morning sunlight highlighted his features. His fierce dark eyes pierced the air before him. At only eight feet tall, he was the smallest of the stone guardians; she’d had no end of grief from her instructors for that. The sword of cold steel, a nearly priceless artifact, in his over-sized hands shone as he stomped through the motions of his routine. Lunge, spin, slice, block, twirl. He fought off an entire invisible army.

Peejee’s eyes moistened. Her thoughts swirled. What was Evascor doing? What could have gone wrong?

He was her final project in becoming a crafter of guardians. But more than that, she had poured all her love and skill into making him. When he’d swung his legs off the stone slab and stood up, she’d felt a fierce pride in her work, a swelling elation. She had walked with her new creation toward his place in the public square, her heart all but jumping out of her chest. It took all her will to stop herself reaching out to take his giant stone hand.

Now, here he was in the morning sun, swinging a sword and stomping through the square. Mad. Dangerous. Out of control. A failure.

“Peejee! What is this?” The master artisan, Ioola, came from the crafter’s quarters. He was struggling for words in his fury. “This is very dangerous.” He raised his voice, “Everyone get back! Stay away!”

Some of the guardian crafters, in their brown tunics, started moving people away from the square.

“How did this happen?” Ioola demanded.

He never liked me. Always wanted me to fail. “I don’t know,” Peejee said. “I was asleep.”

“Where did it get that sword? Why does it have a sword?”

A city guard, standing nearby, responded. “It was standing in its place, over by the wall. An artisan rolled out a cart of swords to take to the armory, and the guardian stepped forward and took one. One of the new ones, made of steel. Then started doing this.”

“Has anyone been hurt?” Ioola’s tone was harsh.

The town guard shook his head. “Not yet. But I would not walk out into that square.”

Ioola shouted. “Someone fetch some of the guardians from the walls. We will need to restrain it.”

“They are coming,” shouted an artisan nearby.

“This is bad,” Ioola said to Peejee. “I told you, you used too much metal in its crafting. Enough for two guardians. A waste! The guardians are not ornamental, they are for our protection. And now look.” He gave Peejee a baleful look. “The king will be very angry.”

Dread mounted in Peejee. “What will happen to Evascor?”

The master artisan’s face grew tight. “We will have to break it down. See if we can reuse some of its materials. Maybe the iron can be melted and re-enchanted. We cannot allow it to continue. It is too dangerous.”

Now the tears broke free, and Peejee’s vision blurred. She had put so much of herself, her hopes and dreams, into crafting him. She would be ruined in the guardian crafters’ guild. So many times she fought them, had been so stubborn and insistent, and now her guardian was doing this. They would never give her another chance. But even that point of pain was nothing next to the thought of tearing him down. That thought was a searing ember in her chest.

“Let me talk to him.”

“Him?” Ioola scoffed. “It doesn’t even talk. No. Maybe,” he shook his head, “there will come a time when you get another chance to craft a guardian, but we must deal with the mad one first.”

Peejee wiped her eyes.

Ioola gave her a cold look. “This could not happen at a worse time, with the Emperor’s army approaching. If the worst occurs, Peejee, we will need every guardian we have. This is a disgrace. Let’s hope the King’s diplomacy can allay the Emperor’s grievances. Let’s hope we don’t find ourselves one guardian short of saving the city.”

A group of soldiers, dressed in black leather battle armor reinforced with slats of iron, came from the palace. Two tall stone guardians, each at least ten feet tall, followed with stern faces and hands that looked like enormous hammers.

Behind them, even taller than the other two guardians, was a figure who towered over all of them. The giant Tarang, the First Guardian: a thousand years old, carved from bright gray stone with a lion’s head, his thick arms and barrel chest fashioned with dragon’s scales. Tarang appeared to be speaking in quiet tones with someone beside him that Peejee could not see.

The people around the square hushed at the sight of the First Guardian. He rarely left the king’s side these days. Tarang concluded his conversation and turned toward the square. He crouched, and watched Evascore’s movements with sharp leonine eyes.

The soldiers broke apart, and a tall man, wearing an elaborate plume on his blackened iron helmet, broke through and approached Ioola. Peejee recognized him, although only she had only ever seen him from afar. He was General Zoraver.

“What is this guardian doing, Ioola?”

“We do not know. It seems to have gone mad.”

“Why is he wielding a sword?”

Ioola shook his head. “We’ll have to have the other guardians restrain it, then we can cast the spell to break it down into components.”

The general’s face darkened. “The city needs all the guardians we can get. This takes away from the strength of our defenses. Discussions with the Emperor are not going well. Any chance it will settle down?”

Ioola pursed his lips. “Unlikely.”

The three of them watched the stoney giant moving though his routine, fluidly going from one deadly maneuver to the next. Bash, thrust, slice.

The general grunted. “I will say one thing. I have trained many, many men in my time, and that thing has cursed fine fighting form. If I had a thousand men that good, our army would be unstoppable.”

Peejee spoke up. “I can talk to him! I can get him to behave.”

The general turned and looked at the young apprentice. “Who is this?”

Ioola scowled. “This is the apprentice that built it.”

“Looks like you used a bit too much metal, did you?” the general observed. “Perhaps that is why it has gone crazy.”

Peejee opened her mouth to speak, but then something happened.

Evascor lunged forward with a final stomp that reverberated through the square and a lethal downward slash, then gathered himself and stood still. He turned and walked back to the wall. Men bustled and hurried to clear a path for him. When he reached the wall, he turned to face the square, straightened at guard, his fierce eyes fixed forward. He held the sword before him, its point on the ground.

Peejee exclaimed, “He stopped!” She ran into the square toward Evascor.

“Wait!” Ioola cried, but she was already halfway there.

Her face came barely to the middle of his chest. Her own chest was pounding. “Evascor,” she said. “What are you doing? This is not right for a guardian. You have to stay here, and wait for them to position you outside, along the city walls. And why are you using a sword? Guardians do not use swords. You are deadly enough…”

Evascor suddenly turned to look at the sky. He stepped forward, readied the sword, and strode into the square. People scrambled to get out of his way. He started his attack again.

Peejee buried her face in her hands, and tears flowed. All lost. The thing was crazy, would be broken down. Who knows if she would be allowed to make another guardian?

She looked up, and saw Ioola open his mouth to issue an order. But general Zoraver raised a hand. The two men argued fiercely.

Tarag, the giant lion-headed guardian, stood and approached them as people hurried out of his way. He spoke a soft sentence Peejee could not hear.

Ioola’s mouth snapped shut. He turned and stalked angrily back to his apartments.

The general shouted across the square. “Rope the square off! Bring in two more guardians, and put one at each corner. If the crazy one breaks the rope, restrain it and we will break it down. Otherwise, no one is to interfere!”

His men scrambled into action as Peejee wiped her face. The general strode around the square, far outside the reach of Evascor’s deadly sword, and approached. His gaze drilled into her.

“How did you teach it to move like that?”

Peejee did not know what to say. “I… I… didn’t. I followed the incantations and prepared the materials…”

“But it is no ordinary guardian, is it?” Conflicting emotions danced on the general’s face. “Clearly it is crazy as a thunderstorm. But… Look at those moves. I have never seen a warrior move so fluidly. How did you do that?”

Peejee shook her head.

The general’s mouth tightened into a line. He turned to his captain. “Bring some of the men down here. I want them to see this. They can learn a lot from watching.”

Peejee’s head pounded with conflicting emotions. What did this mean? Was Evascor still in peril?

She opened her mouth, but found herself unable to form a single question.

People were moving into the fringes of the square, outside the ropes. Other giant stone guardians, each towering over Evascor, came through the city gates and stood at each corner of the square, facing him. Soldiers filed in under command. Their trainers squinted and watched Evascor, calling out the names of his moves. Occasionally they would gasp in astonishment and lean in to confer with each other.

Evascor spun and brought the sword down in a devastating slash, and the crowd paused, then broke out into shouts of admiration.

Ioola’s scowl burned hot as the desert sun.

The day wore on. Evascor stopped again, with a thudding lunge and downward swipe, and walked back to his place at the wall. Peejee, the general, and some of the soldiers’ trainers tried to talk to him and ask questions, but he was still as a statue, gazing fiercely at nothing.

Peejee forgot to eat lunch, and felt light-headed in the hot afternoon sun.

Again and again, Evascor went to the wall, stood still for a few minutes, then stepped forward and raised his sword; everyone scrambled to get out of his way as he started his routine.

An outburst among the crowd. A skinny man in a dirty tunic held up a stick as a sword and a barrel lid as a shield, grinning recklessly and waggling his tongue. He ran into the space and began challenging the stoney giant with obscene taunts. The crowd shouted, some in alarm, some in jest, some clamoring for blood.

The man dashed forward in a pantomime of combat, waving the stick and hollering.

Evascor ignored him, but his slashes and lunges grew ever closer to the man.

Zoraver shouted at his men, “Get that fool out of there! He’ll be killed!”

Some soldiers gathered, but hesitated to cross the rope into danger.

Peejee’s head pounded. Would they destroy Evascor because some buffoon wanted attention and got sliced in two? She rushed to the rope. “Evascor! Don’t hurt him!”

The stoney giant lunged forward, his giant sword catching the edge of the man’s barrel-lid shield. The man staggered from the force of the glancing blow. Evascor stepped forward, within arm’s reach of the man.

He raised his sword over his shoulder for a lethal strike.

“Evascor! Don’t!” Peejee cried.

The giant looked at the man. Then he stepped forward, chest to nose. He reached out with a giant hand and gave a mighty shove.

The man half-flew, half-staggered back and crashed into the crowd. Instantly soldiers encircled him and dragged him outside the protective rope.

Evascor resumed his routine.

Zoraver approached Peejee. “I talked to the captain. We know where his station will be outside the city wall. When he stops his routine again, see if you can convince him to follow you there. We will show you the place. It will be safer for everyone if he is outside the walls.”

Peejee nodded. Head full of yarn. Struggled for words that didn’t come.

The general considered. “And tell Ioola not to take any actions. I do not want anything to happen to this guardian until we better understand what is going on.”

He turned on a heel and walked away, his men falling in behind.

The giant Tarang met Peejee’s eyes in a long gaze, his lion face fixed in an expression Peejee could not decipher. He turned and strode to walk beside the general.

Peejee breathed heavily. Evascor was safe, for now. But she dared not allow herself to smile.

Evascor continued his routine throughout the afternoon. People crowded around square, and some climbed onto the roofs, to watch the spectacle. The combat trainers pushed city folk aside so that soldiers could crowd up to the ropes and watch. Occasionally they would break out in cheers or applause at a particularly satisfying move.

Each routine lasted about an hour and a half, and at the end of it, Evascor returned to his place at the wall, and stood like a statue for a few minutes. Then he would begin again.

Ioola came to Peejee with some bread and cheese. “Have you eaten?”

She shook her head, watching her guardian.

He frowned. “The general told me to wait. See if you can move it outside the walls.”

She looked at him, her eyes red.

He paused. “No one has died yet. The general and I spoke. Whatever happens is on him.” He held out the food for her. “Here. Don’t forget to eat something.” He turned and walked toward his apartments. After a couple of steps he turned slightly. “Be careful.”

Peejee ate, absently, her eyes never leaving her creation.

Finally, as the sun began to set, Evascor returned to his station. Minutes passed and he stayed there.

Peejee walked up to him, and forced a smile. “Evascor, we have to go to your place along the city wall. Come, follow me.”

Evascor turned and looked at her with his dark eyes.

Her breath caught in her throat. She suddenly felt very vulnerable next to this giant of stone.

He stepped forward, looked again to her.

A captain of the royal guard, in black armor and a plumed helmet, led them. Some guards fell in behind Evascor, followed by the four towering stone giants who had been guarding the square. As a procession, they walked down the wide main street of the city, and out the gates.

Peejee could not help herself. She reached and held his giant hand. It felt hard and cool to her touch.

The captain led them around the city walls. They passed more stone guardians gazing into the darkening landscape. They came to a spot where fields stretched out before them, with some low hills not far off. A buttress stood there, bolstering the wall, with a platform a few feet off the ground. The captain stopped and pointed.

“Here,” Peejee said. “This is where you will protect the city.”

Evascor stepped up onto the platform.

“Can you get the sword from it?” asked the captain.

Peejee asked, “Can I have the sword?”

Evascor held the sword tightly, gazing at the hills.

“Very well,” said the captain. “But we’ll have to tell the king. That sword is pure steel. We have very few like it. It is extremely valuable.”

The soldiers and guardians turned and walked back toward the city gate.

Peejee pulled herself up on the platform and leaned against Evascor’s leg. “Why did you do that today? Where did you learn those moves?”

Evascor remained silent.

“I was very worried for you. I have been so lonely since my parents died. I don’t have anything except my apprenticeship.” She pulled her knees up, resting her heels on the stone pedestal. The tension and excitement of the day caught up with her, and she felt her eyelids growing heavy. “I don’t know what I would do if I lost you.”

She closed her eyes, her breathing becoming steady.

As she drifted toward sleep, she imagined half-dreaming what her parents might have thought. Would they smile kindly, her mother taking her in her arms? Would her father put a gentle hand on her head, as she had seen other fathers do? Would her mother tell her in soft tones that she had skill, and if that skill was not for making guardians, it would be for something great.

Remember, her mother would say, how the people gathered and cheered. There is something special there you will find again, even if they break him apart.

A rumbling came, like a storm gathering, waking her. She looked up to see Evascor gazing at her.

He spoke, in a deep voice like rolling thunder.

“I don’t want to be broken up.”

Joy surged inside her. She put a hand on his arm. “Evascor! You’re speaking!”

The stoney giant look at her steadily.

“But tell me, why? Why did you do that? Where did you learn those moves? I didn’t teach you.”

The giant worked to form the words. He said, “I heard a voice.”

“What voice?”

Again, a long pause. “I don’t know.”

“What does it tell you?”

“The Emperor. He is a bad ruler.”

“He is?”

“He makes monsters. He hurts people.” He paused. “Our king. He is good.”

“Well, the Emperor’s army is on the way to the city. I hope we are able to do something about it.”

Evascor nodded. He fell silent.

“But why take the sword, Evascor? No other guardian uses weapons. You are already made of stone and metal.”

Evascor looked at her. Did she see a hint of a smile?

He said, “I like how it feels in my hands.”

----

The most seasoned treasure hunters will warn you, hunt treasures long enough and they begin to hunt you. Hecto Safan was soon to find himself in exactly that situation.

Hecto, a tall young man clad all in red, prepared a small breakfast at the fire. The rich smell of boiling che wafted from a kettle. Birds sang and the fresh brilliance of morning filled the air, while the rising sun lit the forest and meadows with golden light.

He murmured, as if puzzling over a riddle, “White dress, brown cloth, cold stone.”

His companion, King Evascor of Mariguez, took a bite of the large white rock he’d been eating, savoring its wonderful crisp taste--crunchy, rich with minerals, with a pleasant aftertaste of limestone. Much better than the rocks from his home.

He was a giant creature of stone and metal, standing eight or nine feet tall. Intricate patterns of steel interlaced his body and face, the delicate curves highlighting his features. He studied the sky with fierce eyes. With a voice like a sudden thunderstorm rolling in, he said, “First seventh.” He stood and took his giant longsword from where he’d slung it on his back.

Hecto poured a cup of hot che, blew to cool it, and took a sip. “What’s the routine this time?”

Evascor turned to answer and saw a hooded man in brown monk’s robes standing behind Hecto.

The man’s hood hid his face. He raised a dagger with a black serpentine blade, ready to plunge it into Hecto’s neck.

The gray giant had no time to speak. He side-armed the half-eaten white rock at the monk’s head. It struck the man’s face squarely with an unpleasant crack. The monk dropped to the ground in a heap.

Hecto jumped to his feet and looked at the body, dumbfounded. Evascor joined him.

“How did he sneak up on us?” Hecto asked. “Nothing ever sneaks up on you.”

Evascor shrugged. “I don’t know. He wasn’t there until I turned around.”

Hecto picked up the dagger. He saw his face reflected in the black, wavy blade. The hilt bore an embossed image of a skull, highlighted with blood-red lacquer.

Evascor asked, “Is it magic?”

“I can’t tell.”

“Where’s the little statue?”

Hecto looked. “There’s no statue. Where did you see a statue?”

“He had a small white statue in his other hand.”

Hecto shrugged.

His routine interrupted, Evascor dug a grave with his enormous stoney hands. When finished, he laid the monk with his shattered face inside it. He performed the chants and incantations he always did at the graves of his fallen foes so they would find peace.

***

Time flows in a stream, sometimes rushing and furious, sometimes tranquil. I, Vater Adey, walk in that stream.

The hazy vistas of time churn around me in an intoxicating dance. I grip a statuette of a beautiful lady in a gossamer dress, standing straight with her shoulders squared, her hands clasped before her. The door to the monastery at the latest harvest season is only a short walk, at the Festival of Giving. My grip loosens, and the nebulous scene stills and comes into focus.

The White Lady slips into a special pocket of my brown robes. I pull open the wide doors of the monastery to a procession of villagers dressed in their brightest clothes carrying colorful banners. Their carts and wagons bring cheeses, bread, roasted meat, and casks of ale.

I spread my arms and exclaim to the approaching men and women, “Thank you, thank you, good people! Welcome to the Festival of Giving. This is a wonderful occasion. Come in, come in!”

Where is the Red Man? He isn’t visible in the procession. My heart pounds with anxiety and apprehension.

The villagers unload food from their carts and carry it inside. They bow as they pass, but none meet my eyes. I wish I could put these good people at ease, but it is of no matter as long as the festival proceeds.

I pull a parchment from my robes and a piece of charcoal wrapped in cloth to mark items as they bring food in.

“Be merry and rejoice. This is a happy day. Another successful growing season, another successful harvest. Farmer Carner! Were my dates on planting helpful this year?”

The man stops, his arms around a giant bag. The wonderful smell of freshly baked bread fills the air. “Yes, Vater Adey. We got the seeds in the earth days before the rains came. It was most fortunate.”

I cannot help but smile. “And I tell you, there is an early frost coming. Much of this harvest would have been lost.”

Farmer Carner shuffles his feet. “There were heavy rains in the middle of the growing season, so some of the crops were lost. And a disease spread through the pigs. We were able to gather the food for the festival, but there is not as much left over as the village would like. Some will go hungry this winter.”

“After the generous gift of this food for the festival, I’m sure we will have good fortune and bountiful yields next year.”

The man bows, not meeting my eyes, and carries the bag into the monastery. Where my parchment lists bread, I make a mark.

A villager comes from inside carrying a stack of wooden plates. Another follows with a crate of pungent food long since gone bad.

I tell them, “Out with the bad, in with the good. This is a most delightful feast this year.”

They bow slightly and load the plates and spoiled food on their carts.

I draw a sharp breath. Tightness clasps my chest. Walking with the villagers is a giant made of stone and metal, eight or nine feet tall, towering over the villagers. The giant’s gaze sweeps over the monastery and lands on me. The creature’s huge hand comes to his mouth, holding something. Is it a rock? The giant takes a bite.

What mystical monster is this?

Beside him is a man I have never seen before, although I know instantly who he is. A tall youth. Dressed all in red.

The Red Man. The day has come.

I put on my most benevolent smile and approach the strange newcomers.

“Greetings, travelers. Welcome to our village. I am Vater Adey”

The tall young man returns my smile. “I am Hecto Safan. This is my friend, Evascor, King of Mariguez.”

The stoney giant regards me with fierce eyes for a long moment, looks to Hecto, then back to me.

“Welcome both of you. What brings you to our monastery?”

“We seek a treasure lost to time!” Hecto seems easily excited. “We were hoping we could access your archives to look for clues.”

“What treasure is this?” My insides are coiling. I must not trust him; he lies.

“It’s not clear from the texts. The record is incomplete. An artifact of tremendous power was lost in this area, a long time ago.” His brow furrows. “It’s the strangest thing. As I read through the manuscripts I could find, there are pages missing. It’s as if there was an effort to erase the history of this artifact.”

I laugh warmly, though my mind reels. The weight of the statuette in my robes brings comfort. “I don’t know of any artifact. But certainly, you are welcome to visit our library, if you feel that would be helpful. After the festival preparations, of course.”

“Thank you. That would be most helpful. It’s a curious thing. The seer is never wrong about these things, but her words were baffling this time. Her vision was the artifact, whatever it is, would be found in a place with a white dress, brown cloth, and cold stone. Usually, her directions are very clear, but I find this one puzzling.”

Tension crawls up my arms. “Let me see to the preparations for the Festival, and then I’ll take you to the library. You can view the archives.”

Evascor reaches forward and taps Hecto on the shoulder. He points to the sun. “Fourth seventh.”

This is genuinely baffling to me. “What is ‘Fourth Seventh’?”

Hecto waves a hand. “Oh, he trains incessantly. Seven times a day. It makes for a long day when traveling.”

Very strange. “Why does he need to train? Isn’t he magical?”

Hecto shrugs.

The stoney giant faces away from the monastery and removes a giant longsword from where he has it slung on his back. He crouches in a battle stance, then begins his routine. These two are my mortal enemies, but still, I am fascinated.

“This routine is wild,” Hecto says. “Look, it’s as if he’s being attacked from all directions.”

“I see.”

“Usually his routines focus on one powerful foe, or a series of foes charging him from a certain direction.”

“Where does he get the routines to practice?”

“I don’t know. I think he memorized them ages ago.” Hecto gives me a significant look. “He’s been around for a long time.”

“Very well. Please wait here, it will only take a moment.” I hurry inside the monastery. The warm smells of the feast embrace me but I ignore them. I allow the well-practiced expression of benevolence to slip from my face. I whisper under my breath, “He lies.” When out of sight, I clasp the white statuette.

The rippling haze of time envelops me and soothes me. My destination is not far. Forward in time until I find midnight.

I step into the dining hall. The feast of the Festival of Giving spreads across the table. As I walk to the table, others dressed in brown robes appear and approach. We whisper to one another as we eat.

“Heavy rains, damaging the crops.”

“A disease is taking some of the pigs.”

I whisper to my companions. “The Red Man has come.”

The others freeze. Some stop chewing and turn to me.

“What does this mean?”

“What does he want?”

I whisper, “He has a powerful guardian with him. He is looking for the White Lady.”

“The White Lady.”

“How does he know of the White Lady?”

“Who sent him?”

“The Red Men have sent him. He is a scout, a spy. An assassin.”

“A spy.”

“An assassin for the Red Men.”

“They will take it all. They will take the White Lady.”

I continue, “Eat your fill. Build your strength. He does not yet know who we are. He claims he doesn’t know of the White Lady. But I am certain he lies.”

“He lies.” We all say it at once; it becomes a chant. “He lies. The Red Man lies.”

The others turn to look at me. Revealed under the hoods of their robes, they are all Vater Adey.

I hiss, “It is time. I must go back to the start, and perform the task we have been waiting for.”

“It is time. Find the key,” they whisper as one. “Bring us the key.”

I grasp the white statuette.

The room dissolves. The hall, the feast, and all the men in robes melt away. A churning haze as time flows all around me as I walk. The destination is farther this time, so it takes much longer to travel. Through time and down indistinct stone stairs to a hidden room. To the room I’ve visited many times but have never dared to come to at this moment until now.

I emerge onto the stone stairway and ease up to an archway that opens into a large room. Bone-chilling cold and the smell of dust and cobwebs fill the air. Inside stand three men dressed in gray robes with red sashes around their waists.

I stifle a gasp. The men wear red. More Red Men.

The three, strangers to me, stand before a powerful-looking chest forged of steel, of some ancient but impenetrable design, strengthened with great magic. One of them turns a key in the lock on the front, and it clacks loudly, sealing it tight.

They speak to each other in a strange dialect I barely manage to grasp.

“There. It is done. The blasted thing is locked away forever.” The man holding the key turns to his companions. “In the morning, we throw this key into the forge, and pour the molten metal into the lock.”

One of the other men grunts. “May the cursed thing never see the light of day again.”

I grip the statue.

The room fades. A few quick steps through whirling time and into the room, and forward mere seconds.

I am in the room behind the men, pull from my robe a black dagger with a serpentine blade, and plunge it into the back of one of the men.

The man screams, twisting as if his blood is on fire.

The second man turns; I step forward and slash his throat. He grasps his neck as he slides to the floor.

The last man, the one holding the key, is fast. He draws a sword with blinding speed and swings. It passes through the empty air where I had been.

The room melts; three short steps; a second or two.

I am behind the third man and sink the dagger into his neck. He screams and contorts in agony, falling to the ground.

I pry the key from the dying man’s clutch.

Back into the whirl of time. Forward! Forward! Such a long way to travel. Untold years. How long was the White Lady down here, lost to time, before we found her? Centuries? Waiting. Waiting to be free.

The same room, centuries later. The air is still bone-chilling, and still sharp with the smell of cobwebs and dust. The bones of three forgotten corpses lie amidst piles of dust.

In front of me is a man in brown robes. A candle sits on the ground, lighting the impenetrable box with yellow. He examines the impenetrable box closely, probing the keyhole with his finger. It has not decayed a single day, has not tarnished or rusted at all. It looks exactly as it did when I saw it moments before, centuries ago.

I tell him, “The power of the White Lady has kept it free of corrosion.”

The man turns, startled, viewing me with astonishment. The man is Vater Adey.

I speak. “Here is the key you need.” I hand my younger self the cold iron key.

Younger Adey says, “But how?”

“You will come to understand it, understand the power you will hold. It is magnificent. Go on, open it.”

Younger Adey, a bewildered look on his face, inserts the key in the safe. He turns the key, it clacks loudly, and the box cracks open. Younger Adey struggles with it, and the heavy top swings open.

Inside is the white statuette of a lady in a gossamer dress, her shoulders squared, clasping her hands before her.

Younger Adey reaches in and takes the statuette out.

“What is it?” he asks, breathlessly.

“It is the Lady of Flowing Time. Take it. When you hold it, you will be able to travel through time as easily as walking across a room. As easily as walking down a road.”

Younger Adey sets the statuette down to see what else is in the box. It holds a wealth of jewelry and trinkets, and a dagger in a leather sheath. He takes the dagger out.

I tell him, “Keep the dagger. You’ll need it.” I kneel beside the younger man. “Listen, what I have to tell you is important. There is an order called the Red Men. They are in courts around the world, whispering into monarchs’ ears, running the kingdoms of the world with a brutal hand. They have spies everywhere. They see everything.”

“The Red Men? How do I protect the monastery and my brothers from them?”

I wave a hand, frowning. “Your brothers are a lost cause. They will betray you. None of them are left--it is only us now. Use the statue to elude your enemy, to erase any record of yourself, to hide yourself and the statue from the tyrannical Order of the Red Men.”

Younger Adey regards me with a bewildered look.

“One day, one of the Red Men will come to the monastery. They have found us. But the assassin they sent doesn’t know the whole story, doesn’t understand what power the White Lady holds.” I stand. “I am going back now, to kill this assassin before he can kill us. Before he can report the existence of the White Lady to his order.”

“But what should I do now?”

“Make preparations to protect yourself.”

Younger Adey starts at this.

“Every year, you will hold a Festival of Giving. The villagers will bring a sumptuous feast.”

“Why would the villagers bring that much food? We barely survive on what we farm and the scraps they bring us.”

“Use the dagger. They’ll quickly fall in line. You can use the feast to dine on for the year.”

“A year? Won’t the food spoil?”

“When you hunger, use the statue to go forward to next year’s festival. You will see others of us coming to dine too. Tell us what you’ve experienced so we can use that knowledge. When to plant the crops; to warn of coming frost; other dangers to the countryside.”

“Dangers?”

“There will be bandits and evil men. For them, use the dagger. And always be on watch. One day the Red Man will come.”

Younger Adey picks up the statue. “Where should I go now?”

I smile. “The first time I went to was the day the gods left.”

His eyes grow wide.

“Good luck.” I scowl fiercely. “I return to my time--to kill the Red Man.”

Swirl, swirl, and churn. I can barely make out the walls of the monastery around me, but I know well to when I am going. Passing the library on my way, I sense a presence there, in the future.

 

I step into the hallway outside the library. I catch the distinct scent of parchment being handled and edge up to the doorway listening.

“This is amazing!” comes Hecto’s voice. “Evascor, all the missing pages from the manuscripts are right here! The mad monk must have traveled the continent cleaning any record of the statuette. He saved it all.”

“Huh,” Evascor says. “Why do you think he kept them? Why not just destroy them?”

“I don’t know. I think the statuette has a tight hold on the people who use it.”

My thoughts race as my hands curl into claws.

How did they get into the library without me being there?

How did they find my precious trove of pages?

Hecto continues, “There is amazing detail about the statue and its powers. Its creation goes back to the time of the gods.” He pauses. “Evascor, I don’t think I’ve ever asked you this. Were you there when the gods left?”

“No, that was long before my time. Hecto, what do you want to do with the statue?”

“I don’t know. It sounds like everyone who uses it goes mad.”

Mad? Is this assassin in red calling me a madman? My body tenses and I shake with rage. I lean forward and peeks around the doorway into the room.

The moment my eyes poke into view, the stoney giant sees me and leaps to his feet. He bounds toward me with blinding speed, footsteps resounding off the stone floor. At the doorway he swings his giant fist, but I am already gone.

 

Time swirls around. He was ready for me. Where was I? Why did I allow them into the library alone? I need to go back and find answers. Find out what they know. But I must do it before they know about the White Lady.

 

I am still shaking with rage as I step into a side hallway. Taking a moment to force calm upon myself, I breathe deeply and take on my benevolent aspect.

I walk through the main hall and step out into the midday sun. The villagers are finished delivering their food for the festival, and their carts and wagons return to the village. The warm fragrance of bread and meat come from the open door.

Hecto stands off to the side of the road, watching Evascor work through his routine, waiting for my return.

I ponder. I’d thought the stone giant would be powerful, but slow and lumbering. That was not so. When the thing saw me in the library, it bounded toward me with astounding speed. Clearly it’s some magical war machine intended to wipe out scores of men in battle. So how can I separate the two so I can use his dagger on the Red Man?

Watching the stoney giant working through his training exercise, I realizes the answer is obvious. I must move quickly, while the creature is distracted.

Hecto, in his red clothes, brightens when he sees me. “Vater Adey! It appears the villagers have delivered their goods for the feast.”

I give him my most warm smile. He must not suspect. “Yes, it is a wonderful bounty.”

“I’d love to take you up on your offer to show me the library, I’ve been telling Evascor how excited I am. I’m sure we will find the answer to the mystery of this lost artifact.”

Evascor spins and twirls, fighting off unseen opponents with his giant sword.

My heartbeat quickens. “Well, come this way, I’ll show you the library.”

“Lead on!”

We turn and enter the monastery. I pause to push the door shut. “To keep out the draft.” Quietly I throw the latch.

We walk down a long hallway as Hecto talks at length about the mysterious artifact they hunt, and what they do know about it, which isn’t much. “The lore is like a painting where the object was not shown, but shaped by the things around it. It’s very strange. But one thing is clear, it is an amazingly powerful artifact. One of the most powerful in the world.”

“Is it?” I ask, facing Hecto. I grip the statuette.

 

The room fades oh so briefly. A mere few steps, only a second passes.

 

I am behind Hecto, the serpentine dagger in my hand. I drive the dagger down into the Red Man.

But Hecto is quick, his blasted reflexes sharpened by years of treasure hunting. He started moving the moment I vanished. He jumps forward and my dagger swings through empty air.

 

Blur and shift.

 

I am at his side thrusting. Hecto unsheathes his gleaming sword and brings it around blocking my blow.

“Evascor!” the cursed fool cries out.

 

Time swirls for a heartbeat.

 

I am beside him again, slashing. He moves rapidly to the side, swinging the sword hard, but its blade cannot find me.

Down the hallway comes a boom as the door crashes in. Then the heavy footsteps of Evascor racing down the hall.

 

Haze overtakes the man in red, standing there with his sword drawn. I consider his situation. The mighty guardian is an impediment; without him there I would certainly kill the Red Man in time. I don’t know what effect the dagger will have on the stoney creature, but there is only one way to find out.

 

I stand in the hallway just as Evascor speaks.

“Hecto, what’s wrong?”

I lunge at the giant.

The creature wheels with unbelievable speed. I barely have time to grasp the statue and slip away.

I try again from a different angle, but with each attempt, the giant blade comes rushing. My grip never loosens on the white statuette as I move from second to second, searching for an opening. Soon there are multiples of Adey around the giant, perhaps dozens, flickering into and out of existence. But I can not even get within arm’s reach before the giant swings the sword around.

I am exhausted. I slip away into time.

 

Back to the night before the Festival of Giving. Before I met them.

 

In the monastery dormitory, I’ve already taken up most of the beds, but there are a few left. I climb into one and fall fast asleep.

The morning comes, but I wake late, climbing out of bed and stretching. Many of the others have already awakened and gone. I look out the window. The Red Man and the stoney giant walk along with the procession of villagers down the road to the monastery.

I have all the time I need to kill the Red Man, but before that, I resolve to confront him and find out what he knows, and what he really wants. I gripped the statuette.

 

The dormitory fades away. The beds dissolve. Forward! Forward in time and back to the large hallway.

 

Hecto stands there, sword in hand, breathing heavily.

Evascor has his back to Hecto, his fierce eyes scanning the hallway for the monk.

“Where did he go?” asks Hecto.

Evascor’s booming voice is like an avalanche in a canyon. “I don’t see him–wait, there he is.”

I am there, down the hall, far enough to escape into time if they attack.

I shout to them, “Stop–it is time for truth. Tell me what you really know about the statuette, and why you have come to kill me.”

Hecto acts dumbstruck. “What statuette?”

“There’s no point lying. I know about the Order of the Red Men. I know your ways–plotting and scheming, bending monarchs to your will, ruling the world with deception.”

“Order of the Red Men?” Hecto looks at his clothes. “Oh. No, I just look good in red. I’m not part of an order.”

I sneer. “Of course you’re not. You just happened to show up on the day of the Festival of Giving as an ordinary treasure hunter looking for a mysterious artifact.”

Evascor nods. “The timing is suspicious.”

Hecto sputters angrily. “But I am an ordinary treasure hunter who showed up looking for a mysterious artifact.” He pauses. “Actually, no, I’m not ordinary. I’m an extraordinary treasure hunter.”

“I don’t know why you continue to lie. I see through your ruse.”

“Look, what is this statuette you mention? Is that the artifact? If you already have it, I’m not going to take it from you. I’m not a thief.”

“So you say.”

“But can you tell me about it? What powers does it have? It looks like you are able to jump around in space.”

I want so badly to brag about the wondrous powers of the White Lady. But I cannot. The Red Man is my enemy. “You know full well what the artifact is, and you are not a thief, you are an assassin. You’ve come to kill me and take it.”

“I…” Hecto thinks. “Look, I think you’ve got the wrong idea.”

“Both of you are skilled with your swords. But I can attack any time I like, and take my rest for a day, a week, and come back and attack you fresh.”

“Sooner or later, we’ll get lucky and cut you down.”

I force back a laugh. “But I don’t need to kill you now. I can travel to any point in the past and kill you. Before you even knew me.”

 

The Red Man and his blasted companion fade into the whirl of time. I walk from the monastery and travel down the road, back to morning. There I find the indistinct forms of the Red Man and his companion by the road preparing breakfast. I move behind the Red Man and grip the serpentine dagger. The Red Man has no reason to suspect danger, no reason to be on guard. I will make his blood boil. He will writhe and claw the Earth as he dies. I step from the stream of time.

***

Silence fell over the main hall of the monastery, except for the sound of Hecto’s breath. The afternoon sun cast beams of light through the windows. The rich smells from the feast in the dining area drifted in.

Hecto and Evascor watched apprehensively, back to back, their swords in hand. Moments passed, painfully slowly. Hecto said, “Well, that’s not good.”

“Can he really attack us in the past?”

Hecto shugged. “It sounds like it.”

“What happens if he attacks us in the past, Hecto?”

“I don’t know how that works. Would we die suddenly? Would we disappear?”

Evacsor took a deep breath. “Hecto, I don’t feel like we’re being attacked.”

Hecto and Evascor exchanged a look.

Evascor said, “Remember that strange monk we killed at breakfast on our way here?”

Hecto pursed his lips. “Hm… The one you killed with a rock?”

“Do you think...”

Hecto snapped his fingers. “You know, I thought there was something familiar about him.”

Suddenly, the small white statuette appeared before them on the cold stone floor of the monastery, where Vater Adey had been. There was no sign of the monk.

Hecto and Evascor turned and regarded it.

Hecto sheathed his sword and walked over to the statuette. “You were right. There was a little statue.”

“I told you so.”

“And the Seer’s vision. White dress!” He pointed to the statuette. “Brown cloth… the monk’s robe! And here it is on the cold stone of the floor! So obvious. Exactly like the Seer said.”

“I know, I know. The Seer is always right.”

“Evascor, this is the treasure!”

“But why did it return to this spot when he died? Is that part of its magic?”

Hecto shrugged. “Let’s find the library and look for answers.”

Evascor slung his giant longsword on his back where he kept it. He said in his rumbling voice, without a trace of irony, “This was our shortest adventure yet. It ended before it even started.”

----

Evascor considered the stone brick carefully. It sat half-submerged in a pool of clear water. Normally he preferred rocks sitting in nature, gathering rich flavors and subtle undertones from their environment. River rocks were the tastiest. But there was something about this particular stone brick that caught his eye. He tentatively reached down and picked it up.

“Are you coming?” asked Hecto, looking back. The tall young man wore dusty and tattered red traveling clothes. He regarded the stoney giant with annoyance. “We’re almost there.”

“Of course,” Evascor replied with a voice that rumbled like distant thunder rolling in. He plucked the brick from the pool and stood up straight to his full 8 or 9-foot height, a massive figure of stone covered with iron inlays glowing a faint blue, running throughout his face and body in intricate designs.

Over one shoulder he had a thick leather strap that came down to a heavy leather pouch at his waist. Inside the pouch was their secret — the fabulous Ruby of Mariguez, prize of a line of kings going back beyond remembered history. Holding the ruby made Evascor the King of Mariguez.

“Hurry up!” Hecto called. “I think this place is empty! This will be our easiest treasure yet!”

“Of course,” Evascor replied again, catching up to the young man with long strides.

His supernaturally sharp eyes scanned the grounds of the ancient ruined temple. Some columns and archways still stood, but most had fallen under the ravages of the passing millennia. Some portion of an upper floor stood here and there, crumbling at the edges down to piles of stone brick. At some time the temple must have been magnificent. Its state of collapse attested to its age. Hecto had said this temple was older even than the Mariguez kingdom.

Evascor brought the stone brick to his mouth and took a tentative bite. It was wonderful. He had no idea where the brick was quarried, but it had a bold flavor with rich undertones of minerals. The vast time of being exposed to the elements had deepened its flavor, and subtle hints of harsh sunlight and bitter wind had shaped and defined the taste even more. He savored the taste as he chewed, then took a larger bite.

“…just that it has something to do with Seeing. I’ve capitalized Seeing because it has some special quality.” Hecto stopped and regarded the giant. “Are you even listening?”

Evascor stopped chewing for a moment. He nodded.

“So,” Hecto continued with a hint of annoyance in his voice, “if the Eye of Destiny really is here, and if it is unguarded, it might be an easy stepping stone to help you reclaim your throne. As is your destiny.”

Evascor took another bite of the brick, watching Hecto pick his way through the ruins of the temple.

Hecto was a tall young man, dressed all in red. His traveling clothes were tattered, patched together in places. It was clear he had traveled far in those same clothes. Now he and his companion were standing in a broken temple in the untamed jungles of the Southern Wilds.

He drew a sharp breath. “Look!” he said, pointing to a faint glow near the center of the collapsed temple. “That must be it. It’s exactly where the manuscript said it would be.”

“Exactly?” Evascor asked in his rumbling voice.

“Well, the manuscript was all crouched in riddles and mystery, but piece it together and it leads here. Exactly.” Hecto eased forward, peering. “I believe it is unguarded! What luck!”

Evascor shook his head. His supernaturally fine senses heard movement, something large breathing heavily, and he saw the rocks and dust stirring. “No, there’s something there.”

“Blazes,” Hecto muttered. “OK, let’s go see what it is.”

The two eased forward, Evascor retrieving the heavy longsword he kept in a sling on his back. Hecto had helped fashion the sling for him to carry the heavy sword in their travels.

Hecto unsheathed his own sword, but it looked pitifully small next to the giant’s blade. Evasor’s was plain shining steel, but Hecto’s glowed with a faint blue flame, revealing its magical nature.

They came to the center of the temple complex, moving forward quietly, when a huge shape burst from the central temple and rushed toward them. Evascor reached out and swept Hecto behind him. The young man tumbled to the dirt and shattered masonry. The stoney giant slashed out with his giant sword, deflecting the path of an obsidian-clawed paw the size of a log as it crashed down on them.

Before them crouched a creature of nightmares. Taller than Evascor, a jumble of tigear body parts enhanced and oversized by dark magics, assembled and fused with plates of black metal. His face had the catlike snout of a tigear, but he stood upright on powerful legs, with oversized arms that mingled with his armor.

He lifted a claw and slashed again. Only Evascor’s surprising speed, strength and nimbleness allowed him to dodge or heave the blows of the huge beast aside with his longsword.

Hecto scrambled back, away from the fight as the two titans clashed in a terrifying collision of power and speed.

Evascor used all his great skill as a swordsman to bring his longsword around in deadly blows. But each time he met only the armored plates of his foe.

Back and forth they fought, Evascor’s sharp longsword clanging off the metal plates, failing to bite into the beast’s flesh. The giant beast slashing and pounding the air and ground around Evascor, unable to get a solid hit on the stoney giant.

It was as if the beast was anticipating Evascor’s every move. With each slash, the creature shifted until the blow landed on his armor. With each charge, the creature danced out of the way before Evascor even started forward. It was like the stony giant was fighting a shifting wall of metal that saw each slash, lunge, and bash coming before it even landed.

Evascor heard Hecto’s voice behind him. “Back! Regroup!” He traded several more blows, then broke off in an intricate dance, jumping free of the beast and running toward his companion.

The giant beast lumbered after them, slower but unstoppable in his fury.

Evascor approached Hecto where he stood with his sword still drawn, prepared for the beast’s charge.

But the giant metal-encrusted tigear stopped at the broken circle of the temple’s outer wall. He regarded the two companions with a murderous gaze, then turned back and disappeared into the shadows of the ruined temple.

“Hecto, I’ve never experienced that before,” Evascor said. “I couldn’t get the better of the thing.”

“Extraordinary,” Hecto said, shaking his head.

Evascor paused to stoop down and pick up a smooth white rock. He regarded it for a moment then took a bite. He considered—tasty, but not as good as the rich flavors of the stone brick from the temple.

Hecto exhaled a heavy breath. “Well, anyway, clearly we are going to need a different strategy. Here’s what we know: he doesn’t seem to like to cross the temple’s boundary, or maybe he can’t. That is a good distance from where the Eye of Destiny sits. Also, it’s very clear you are both evenly matched, neither able to get the better of the other.”

Evascor nodded, crunching on the white rock.

Hecto frowned. “Are you eating again? Now?”

Evascor stopped chewing for a moment, then shrugged. He took another bite.

“Let’s rest,” Hecto continued, “and in the morning take a two-pronged approach. You engage the creature at the periphery, while I sneak around behind him and take the Eye.”

“That will leave you vulnerable if the plan goes wrong,” Evascor observed.

Hecto waved a hand. “I’m pretty quick on my feet. If the beast detects our plan, I’ll get to safety.”

Evascor nodded, chewing his rock thoughtfully.

***

Morning came, and the breaking sun found Evascor sitting on the ground outside their campsite facing the morning sun. He held one of the smooth white rocks, but his hand sat at his side, the rock forgotten.

Hecto came over and sat beside him.

“No routine this morning?”

Usually at the break of dawn and then periodically throughout the day, Evascor would run a fighting routine, practicing moves for confronting foes in different scenarios. This morning, when he awoke, he’d run through the list of routines he had memorized so long ago and drew a blank. Nothing seemed applicable.

“It’s a strange feeling, Hecto,” he admitted, his voice rumbling like thunder. “It feels like I always have something to review, some technique to hone. But there is nothing in my long list of routines that suits this scenario. It’s very strange.”

“Fortunately,” Hecto said, “you have your millennia of fighting experience, supernatural senses, and remarkable reflexes. I am sure today is the day we secure our prize.”

The stoney giant turned to the young man, a faint smile playing on his hard face. “OK.”

Hecto stood and brushed the dirt off his pants.

“Are you worried?” Evascor asked.

“Worried about what?”

“That we might not be able to get the treasure this time?”

The young man threw his head back and laughed. “Not at all! This treasure is part of our destiny. To take your rightful place on the throne of Mariguez. I’m sure we’ll have the thing in our hands before nightfall.”

Evascor smiled.

***

Evascor stood outside the perimeter of the shattered temple. To the side, his unnaturally keen hearing picked up Hecto’s signal — two slaps against his chest. The stoney giant stepped carefully over the shattered outer wall and approached the center of the temple.

All was quiet, but his supernatural hearing could make out the faint stirrings of the giant guardian.

He got closer, but the beast wasn’t going to react until he got too close.

He got too close.

With a roar, the giant tigear leaped up and raced at him, claws slashing.

Evascor lashed out with his sword, but again and again found only the metal plates fused into the thing’s flesh.

He fell back, intentionally, drawing the beast closer to the shattered temple wall.

But even as he drew the beast back, he felt the creature pulling him to the side — closer to Hecto.

They struggled for position, Evascor pulling the beast away, the beast veering toward Hecto, until Evascor looked up and with horror saw Hecto creeping through the ruins, well inside the outer wall, sneaking toward the treasure.

The guardian saw him too.

The giant tigear roared and raced toward Hecto with a speed that surprised both companions. Hecto stumbled and turned, struggling to pull his glowing sword from its sheath.

The beast readied to pounce.

In desperation, Evascor ran and dived at the monster. He wrapped his stoney arms around one giant meaty leg.

The guardian roared with murderous rage, plummeting to the ground, shaking the earth. One claw lashed out, landing mere inches from Hecto, carving a gouge in the dirt and broken brick.

It was enough. Hecto scrambled to his feet and was off in a flash, back toward the outer wall.

The beast turned on Evascor, now in close fighting range, as the giant of stone fiercely fought off the obsidian-clawed slashes of his opponent. At this range, his sword was useless. It took all his skill and might to fend off the slashes, to give the monster a hard shove and then break free. He was right behind Hecto, running for the outer wall.

They sat outside the wall, Hecto panting heavily and Evascor gazing into the temple with dark eyes. As they watched, the beast crept up to the ring of broken bricks. He sat and regarded the companions.

“I almost had you both,” he said in a voice that was half growl.

Hecto and Evascor exchanged a look. Hecto stated, mildly surprised, “You can speak.”

“Yes.”

“Do you have a name?”

The thing smiled harshly. “I used to. But it was so long ago it hardly matters now.”

Hecto noted that above his cat-like snout, in his mottled fur, where his eyes should have been were two empty, darkened holes.

“You fight well,” Evascor said. “I was a guardian myself, for many centuries. I’m not used to being thwarted in combat.”

The thing chuckled with a low roar. “I’m not used to interlopers in my realm surviving.” He paused, then admitted, “You fight well, too. I’ve rarely seen anyone wield a sword so effectively. And even then they don’t last as long.”

“Thank you,” Evascor said.

Hecto said, “You guard the Eye of Destiny.” It was a statement, not a question.

The beast turned his blinded face toward Hecto. “Indeed,” he said.

“There are things I wish to understand. The manuscript was poised in riddles and mystery. What does the Eye do exactly? It’s something to do with Seeing.”

“With a capital ‘S’,” Evascor added.

The guardian’s harsh smile widened. “Some mystery is good. We regret when learning dispels it.”

“What happened to your eyes?” Evascor interjected, genuinely curious.

The creature flinched at the question. He turned his great head aside, licking his whiskers with an oversized tounge. His voice came as a harsh whisper. “I used to have eyes. I didn’t like them.”

“What happened?” Hecto asked.

“I removed them.”

The three fell silent, thoughts and feelings swirling, unspoken.

“You say you were a guardian,” the beast asked, turning his blind face to Evascor. “What did you guard?”

Evascor brightened. “The tomb of the last king of Mariguez!”

The beast shook his head. “I don’t know about that. That was after my time.”

“Well, the Ruby of Mariguez?”

“Ah, the Ruby. We called it the Ruby of Life. Quite the treasure. And where is it now?”

Evascor patted the pouch at his hip.

“I see! Well, keep it safe.”

“I do.”

Hecto cleared his throat. “Come on, Evascor. Let’s get back to camp. I want to reflect on today’s effort.”

The beast spoke in a growl. “It’s best you leave. You’ve done well to stay alive so far, but don’t make tomorrow your final day.”

***

The next sunrise found Evascor swinging his blade, going through some old maneuvers in a half-hearted fashion, but it didn’t feel relevant.

Hecto approached, stretching. “Did you see his eyes? Or, rather, the lack of them?”

Evascor stopped his practice. “Yes. It was very strange.”

“So if he’s blind, how does he see? I believe he’s using the power of the Eye to See.”

“I don’t understand.”

“See… with a capital ‘S’,” Hecto explained. “He’s not just seeing, he’s Seeing.”

“Ah,” said Evascor, still not understanding.

“Clearly, he has some form of precognition. I think that’s why he blinded himself. His vision was disorienting with his foresight. Without his vision to distract him, he can simply foresee every move of his opponent.”

Evascor nodded, understanding. “So fighting him is going to be of no use. Nor is sneaking.”

“We have to test the limits of his Sight. He told us not to return tomorrow, meaning…” Hecto eyed his stoney companion expectantly.

“…that he doesn’t want us to come back?” Evascor ventured.

“No! Well, yes. But more importantly, he can’t see what will happen tomorrow. There are limits to his Sight.”

“Capital S?”

“Exactly.”

The pair approached the temple once more. Hecto stepped up to the perimeter. “Guardian!” he called out. “I have a challenge for you!”

There was a low rumble and the sound of claws over stone bricks. The monster appeared from the ruins.

“Yes?”

“I have a challenge for you. Let’s play a game of riddles.”

“Oh, good. I like riddles.”

“If you cannot answer my riddle, you must hand over the Eye of Destiny. Agreed?”

“And if you cannot answer my riddle?” the beast asked, his sharp-tooth grin widening.

“Then, ah, I will step inside the temple.”

“Hecto!” breathed Evascor.

“It’s OK. Don’t worry. I’ll go first.”

“Very well.”

“I curl—“

“Fire.”

Hecto fell silent, his expression darkening.

“Is that right?” Evascor asked.

“Yes,” Hecto admitted.

“Now,” said the beast. “It is my turn.” He paused to lick his lips with an enormous wet tongue. His eyeless gaze shifted to the horizon. His brow furrowed. “Actually, I don’t know any riddles. Why don’t you go again?”

“Uh, OK.” Hecto cleared his throat. “Wisps of—“

“Snow.”

Hecto turned on a heel and walked back to camp.

“Where’s he going?” the guardian asked. “It was just getting fun.”

Evascor shrugged.

“I miss the company of my kind. You know, one time all this,” the beast waved a giant, armor-plated arm, “was a mighty kingdom. Scores of tigears with an advanced civilization, stretching as far as you could see. I used to climb to the upper floors of the temple just to look out at the city and the expanse of the kingdom. It was fabulous.”

“What were you before you were a guardian?” Evascor asked.

“I have always been a guardian. The sages constructed me at the same time they crafted the Eye. They built me from parts of fallen warriors and great pieces of mystical armor.”

“Sounds like you miss them. Do you ever think of going to rejoin your kind?”

The great beast’s head drooped. “Sometimes tribes of tigear wander through here. They pass by quickly. They view me as an abomination.”

“What happened to the kingdom?”

The guardian gazed into the distance. Conflicting emotions played across his broad face, his whiskers flicking. Finally, one side of the struggle won out, and he spoke.

His voice was a low rumble. “They fell. All the grandeur of the tigear kingdoms succumbed to a dark destiny.” He paused for a moment, reflecting.

The beast’s tone grew somber. “The mighty tigear who ruled this ancient kingdom wanted ever more power. But he was… not that bright. The rulers of the neighboring kingdoms kept outsmarting him, foiling his plans, chipping away at his territory. And so, he used the wealth of this kingdom to bring in sages to fashion the Eye of Destiny.”

“He wanted to be able to foresee and counteract the actions of his rivals,” Evascor said, nodding.

“Yes, and for a time it seemed like it was working. But, like I say, the king was not that bright. No one saw the terrible price he was paying for using the eye. He began to withdraw into himself, his body growing frail, his eyes losing their luster and eventually even what little intelligence they’d had. His orders to his armies became rote and soulless. The kingdom collapsed. And its collapse led to chaos in the entire region.”

“Destiny came for him and his kingdom,” Evascor said softly.

“And it was a dark destiny.”

***

The next morning, the sunrise found Evascor sitting across from the guardian at the edge of the temple.

The giant tigear was laughing a boisterous whoop. “…then they come in waving a flaming sword and they’re like ‘I am the Chosen One!’ And I’m like, chomp.”

Evascor laughed a deep, rumbling laugh. “How about the fake treasure ploy? Oh there’s the Ruby… I must have left it outside the cave. Silly me! Like I’m going to fall for that!”

“I almost feel bad for them. They get all geared up, with all their shiny magic trinkets, and… oh here comes your friend.”

Hecto appeared, hauling a heavy bag. He upended it and out poured a pile of gold coins, a sample of the king’s treasure from the tomb of the King of Mariquez. From his pocket he pulled forth a pair of dice. Precious looking, made of ivory and opal, with sapphire symbols inlaid in the sides.

“Oh, those are the king’s dice,” said Evascor. “From his tomb. I remember when he got them for his birthday.”

“Let’s wager,” said Hecto, a dark grin breaking out on his face.

Evascor, who had always been bored by gambling, turned and wandered back to camp.

He pulled out his sword and swung it a few times.

It felt strange being on this side of the treasure — the outside. He was beginning to understand what Hecto saw in the chase. It was exciting to travel through dangerous territory, fighting off threats, braving dangers, only to find the greatest danger at the treasure site.

He had become king by taking up the Ruby of Mariguez, leaving centuries of guarding the tomb. Since he’d joined Hecto on his adventures, they’d recovered several artifacts. Some of them were duds. Some of them were fakes. But now, faced with the prospect of finding something genuine and truly special, he understood the thrill.

Hecto’s reading of the ancient manuscript had teased out riddles of the Eye of Destiny. The manuscript linked its dark power to the fall of an entire kingdom, and the guardians tale shined some light on why. Now, faced with the question of what was the true nature of the magical thing and what was its history, Evascor felt something stirring inside.

He stepped forward, his heavy foot thumping on the ground, falling into a ferocious battle pose.

Evascor walked back to the temple, a fierce determination in his eyes. He found Hecto, about to roll the dice, clad only in his undergarments, a few coins on the ground before him.

The monster knelt on the other side of the temple periphery. Before him lay a large pile of gold, Hecto’s flaming sword, and all of Hecto’s red clothes.

Hecto pushed his remaining few coins forward. He clasped the dice and shook them, the sound rattling in his hands.

Evascor stepped up to the creature.

The guardian, looking up, recognized the look in Evascor’s dark eyes right away. “Ah,” he said. “I see you’ve crossed fully over to the other side. No longer a guardian, now the hunter. Shall we fight for it, until one of us lies dead?”

“I will have the Eye,” said Evascor. He drew his fierce longsword from the sling on his back.

The two of them locked gazes, Evascor’s dark eyes meeting the guardian’s unseeing but Seeing gaze. With the bond they had formed, they understood each other completely.

“So be it,” said the monster. “It can be no other way.” He flicked Hecto’s clothes back over the boundary. “You can have your clothes back. They don’t fit me.”

“Evascor,” Hecto said. “What are you doing?”

“I will have the Eye,” Evascor repeated. He stepped over the boundary of the temple.

The giant guardian was on him in a flash, but Evascor broke free, running deeper into the temple. No longer facing the beast head-on, he began to dart around broken columns, through leaning archways, using the terrain to his advantage. Anything to disrupt the guardian, and catch him off guard.

Sensing the new level of danger to the game, the guardian increased the ferocity of his attacks. He began to counter Evascor’s maneuvers by using the terrain against him. Pushing leaning columns over to trap him. Smashing archways so the heavy bricks fell on him.

And always the frenzied slash of claws and swords—reaching out, biting, looking for purchase.

Hecto watched, straining to see as the combatants negotiated the area, seeking any opening for a death blow.

He saw Evascor bring the sword around and slice a gash in the creatures side.

He saw the creature catch Evascor with a slash, knocking chunks of rock off his shoulder.

The fighting mounted, becoming ever more fierce.

The young man watched for a while, then he carefully pulled on his clothes, thinking deeply.

***

The next morning broke, and the combatants were still at it. Sometime during the night they had started taunting each other as they swooped and lunged calling out the other’s misses and fumbles. But they also called out the particularly good moves as the other got closer.

Their battle was taking its toll. Evascor had numerous chunks knocked out of parts of him, and the creature had scores of small wounds that black blood trickled from.

Hecto turned and went back to camp.

***

The morning after found them still at it. Most of the standing ruins inside the temple had been knocked down, so that it looked like a gravel pit. But despite their magical natures, the battle wore them down. There was a noticeable pause between the tigear monstrosity’s lunges, and Evascor was limping on one leg. But they still clashed.

Evascor was still unable to make progress toward the Eye of Destiny. He would have to utterly destroy his opponent or be destroyed first.

His sharp sight caught Hecto’s expression watching the battle. Worry was etched on the young man’s face.

“Don’t worry,” Evascor called out. “I am wearing the beast down.”

“Worry!” the monster countered. “Your friend is losing his capacity for the fight.”

“Evascor!” Hecto called. “Maybe we just let this one go after all. It is a fine treasure, but there are other treasures.”

“There you go,” said the monster. “That’s the spirit.”

“No!” the stoney giant yelled back. “I will not falter. We will have the Eye.”

The two clashed, the monster coming in close, inside Evascor’s sword reach, raking his giant claws on the stoney giant’s side. Evascor got a leg up and pushed him away with a mighty kick, slashing out with the sword and leaving a gash across the monster’s chest.

The two stumbled back and landed on the ground.

The monster’s chest heaved with exhaustion, black blood streaming from his wounds.

Evascor was all but spent, chunks of stone taken out of him, the blue glow of his iron inlays dimmed.

“Are you done, monster?” asked Evascor.

“No,” said the guardian. “Not by a long shot. Let’s just… rest for a moment.”

Evascor glanced back at Hecto, saw the worry deepening on the young man’s face.

“Take heart,” he called to Hecto. “There is only one way this can be resolved. I am the King of Mariguez, and I will have the Eye.”

He saw a flicker cross the young man’s face, and his eyes narrowed, his brow furrowing. Then his expression changed. The worry left his eyes, replaced by a new sparkle.

But the guardian recovered faster than Evascor, his wounds healing shut. He rose to his feet, panting heavily, his breath coming out as a cloud of hot steam. He flexed his muscles and crossed over to where Evascor lay.

That’s when Hecto approached him, carrying a small iron-bound chest, a determined look on his face.

“Hecto!” Evascor breathed. “Careful! Get out of here.”

Hecto smiled at him and turned to the monster.

“Yes?” asked the guardian with a sinister rolling chuckle forming in his throat.

“I would like the Eye of Destiny now,” said Hecto.

The tigear looked at the young man with sightless eyes for a long moment. Then he said, “What?”

“Look. It’s obvious how this is going to end. I am a master treasure hunter, and I will keep trying different ways until one of them works. This battle is fierce, but Evascor has survived for a couple of millennia. He will escape this predicament and come at you again. We will keep trying over and over until we win the prize.”

“Unless I kill you both now,” growled the monster.

“But you won’t. First of all, I’m faster than you and you can’t catch me. You can’t even stand up straight. But also because it’s over and you know it. The Eye of Destiny will be ours… it’s inevitable.”

“It… it doesn’t work that way.”

“Look, your Sight is amazing, and you’ve anticipated us at every turn. But it’s limited. I guarantee that you have blind spots. Sooner or later I’ll find one.”

“I can’t just give it to you. What’s to stop anyone from walking up and saying ‘Give me the Eye’?”

“I’m here and they’re not.”

The creature’s face went blank. His eyeless gaze shot out, peering into the depths of destiny.

Evascor pushed himself up, coming to his feet. He raised his blade, preparing a death stroke.

“No,” Hecto said, raising a hand. “It’s OK.”

Evascor lowered his blade.

The young man and stoney giant watched as the creature gazed into the distance. Then his attention snapped back to the young man. He spoke. “You’re right,” he said. “Thank you for sparing me. Come on, it’s this way.”

Evascor hesitated as the others started off. “Hecto?”

“Yes?”

“What just happened?”

Hecto shrugged. “Destiny. Destiny just happened.”

Evascor followed the other two. He kept his sword at the ready, every fiber of his body tense, but Hecto was completely unconcerned.

They crossed the ruined temple, its columns and archways fully smashed, until the group came to a small plinth in the center.

On it sat a gleaming eye. It radiated a strange power, such that not even the dust dared come to rest on it. It was fashioned from smoky crystal, an inlay of mystic wood and black obsidian forming an iris. It looked exactly like a large eye twice the size of Hecto’s fist.

Hecto stepped forward, but the creature reached out and touched his arm.

“Careful,” he said. “The thing is cursed.”

“The manuscript said something about that, but I didn’t understand.”

The beast’s voice grew somber. “There was a terrible lesson my king learned: If you use the Eye of Destiny even a single time, you become locked in your destiny. You lose all free will and the ability to decide or choose your own course. It drains you of your humanity and ultimately your life.”

“Even if you just it just once,” Evascor rumbled.

“But what about you?” Hecto asked. “How can you see without eyes? How can you see what’s going to happen?”

“It’s all these long years exposed to the eye. I have a limited prescience. I can see what’s about to happen very clearly. I can see what’s soon faintly. But I can’t see past today.”

He spread his arms wide. “But look at me now, I never used the thing, and I am still trapped in its orbit. Stuck in these ruins for three millennia.”

The three fell silent, regarding the artifact before them.

Hecto nodded, understanding. “We’ll be careful. Thank you for the warning.”

He pulled forth a heavy cloth. He cautiously wrapped the eye in it, careful not to touch it with his skin. He lowered the cloth and the eye into the chest. He latched it shut.

“And you? What will you do now?” asked Evascor.

The giant beast’s face broke out in a broad grin. “I don’t know. For the first time in my existence, I… have no destiny.”

“Why don’t you travel with us?” Hecto asked.

The beast’s gaze again shifted off into the infinite. His expression relaxed, his sightless eyes probing into the depths of a now uncertain future. Finally, he turned to Hecto.

“No, I don’t think so.”

“Ah, well OK.”

Evascor smiled. “What do you see in your future?”

“I enjoyed gambling. That was fun. I’ve always dreamed of traveling to the Western Isles, to experience the strange creatures and civilizations I’ve heard tales of.”

Hecto thought for a moment. “Wait, what is your name? You didn’t tell us.”

He creature chuckled. “There wasn’t any point. But now that I’m spared from my destiny… I suppose it does matter now.”

Evascor smiled. “Well?”

The beast smiled back, this time kindly. “I am Nyehaa.”

***

Hecto and Evascor stepped over the crumbled remains of the outer wall of the temple. Only moments ago it had been a line between life and death. Now it was just a ring of stone bricks in the dirt.

Evascor reached down and scooped up one of the bricks. He eyed it with relish, anticipating its delicious flavor.

Before taking a bite, he asked, “Hecto, what will you do with the Eye? It is too dangerous to use.”

Hecto started, as if he hadn’t even considered the question. He waved a hand. “Oh, I don’t know. Find a place to store it I suppose. But while you were fighting I came across a strange scroll that described an ancient figurine, a beautiful dancer fashioned of gold, encrusted with gems. I thought we might try to find where it is.”

“Of course,” Evascor said. He took a large bite of the stone brick. It was delicious.

----

Hecto Safan dreamed of a gigantic, elaborately decorated ballroom. Brightness and splendid music filled the warm, fragrant air. Birds fluttered above, dipping and twirling as they sang. In the center of the floor, a woman danced. Hecto heard her delighted laughter as he walked toward her. She was all gold and bright gems---her shining skin, her beautiful dress, her stunning hair. She laughed and twirled, dancing lightly to the wonderful music.

As he drew close, he reached out to her. “You’re the golden dancer. The Seer told me where to find you.”

The lady turned to him smiling, her brilliant green eyes locking with his.

Hecto said, “You’re the treasure I’m looking for.”

The walls of the ballroom began to close in. The lady turned and danced away from Hecto. “No, stop!” he cried. The walls drew in tighter. He struggled, but couldn’t move.

“Come back! I have to find you!”

Hecto woke to find he was trapped. His blanket held his body tightly, pressing his hands against one cheek, and pinning his elbows to his chest. He could move his legs a little, but not enough to wriggle free of the blanket that ensnared him. He fought his panic, forcing himself into an unnatural stillness.

The soft sun peeked over the horizon through the trees. The air smelt of dew.

Across the clearing a gray figure, a giant formed from stone and metal, wielded an enormous longsword, going through the motions of fighting off a great army. The fierce rocky face focused its dark eyes in concentration. An unseen horde of attackers fell as the longsword swung in powerful arcs.

Hecto struggled again, trying to free his arms. He was stuck. He twisted his head to figure out what held him and found a wall of tawny fur behind him, holding the blanket fast. Dread bubbled up as he realized a wall of fur that size could only be the back of a huge lionbear. Once again the panic built up, and this time he could not fight it.

“Psst!” He hissed at the rocky creature across the clearing.

The giant continued through his motions, fighting off a seemingly endless stream of phantasmal attackers.

Hecto hissed more loudly. Then, frustrated, he whispered forcefully, “Evascor!”

For the first time since Hecto had met the gray giant, Evascor---who was the king of the ancient Mariguez Kingdom---stopped his routine and turned to look at Hecto. He slung his enormous longsword on his back, leaned over to pick up a half-eaten stone, and walked to where the young man was pinioned in his own blanket. The huge form of a lionbear snuggled up against him, fast asleep.

Evascor took a bite of the stone, and crunched it loudly. He leaned over Hecto, put a hand on the beast’s shoulder and gave it a shove. He spoke with a voice that sounded like a thunderstorm had erupted in the clearing. “Grawf,” he said. “Wake up. You’ve trapped Hecto.”

The lionbear stirred. He rolled his head back and looked at Evascor. The stoney giant gave the terrifying beast another hard shove, and the enormous lionbear rolled away from Hecto, freeing the young man.

Hecto sprung up, his eyes wide with terror, and scrambled away from the beast. He reached over to pull his shining sword from its sheath.

Grawf and Evascor looked at Hecto curiously. “What are you going to do with that sword?” asked Evascor.

“At least the ballads will sing that I died with a sword in my hand.”

The beast reached a claw up to scratch behind his ear.

“Grawf likes you. Why don’t you make some breakfast?”

“His name is Grawf?” Hecto leaned away from the deadly lionbear and whispered to Evascor. “Why is he here?”

“He came last night. I’ve known him since he was a cub. He used to visit me at my cave.”

“Who named him Grawf?”

“His mother and father.”

Hecto sighed with a shudder. Of course they did. However, this report did not ease his alarm.

Shortly, Hecto was dressed in his all-red traveling clothes. He sat before the fire holding a roasted rabbit that was significantly flattened from the rock that Evascor had hurled at it the day before. He held it, but could not bring himself to eat while the murderous lionbear snored loudly behind him. The young man looked past his food with distress etched deeply into his face.

“Hecto,” Evascor said, sitting across the fire, his voice rumbling like boulders falling from a cliffside. “I have something to say to you.”

The young man looked up, his eyes still wide and flicking with fear.

“I think we are not going to find this treasure.”

“The golden dancer figurine?”

Evascor looked at him with dark eyes. “Yes. Why do you want it so much?”

“What do you mean?” Hecto was genuinely puzzled.

“What if we don’t find it? What would happen if we just go home?”

These words failed to find meaning in Hecto’s mind. Just? Go? Home? Without the treasure? That didn’t sound right. Surely Evascor meant something else. “We would just have to come back later. It must be very close. I’ve checked the map---and we have very specific directions from the Seer.”

Evascor pursed his stoney lips. “We’ve been wandering around for days.”

Hecto’s brow furrowed. “The Seer was very specific: Pool, waterfall, beam of light. It has to be there.”

At this, the mighty Grawf stirred and rolled his head back and opened his huge brown eyes to look at Hecto. The beast’s ears twitched.

The lionbear tumbled over and stood to his full eleven-foot height, stretched his arms out, and roared a mighty waking-up roar. Hecto recoiled, his eyes growing even wider. Grawf dropped back down to all fours and walked to the edge of the clearing. He turned and growled softly at Hecto. “Rrr.”

Evascor said, “He wants us to follow him.”

They quickly packed up the camp, and followed Grawf. The sun rose in the sky as they moved through the deadly forest of the Wilds.

After they traveled a good distance, Hecto asked Evascor, “Don’t you have your routine to do?”

The stoney giant shrugged. “It can wait.” He rumbled uneasily, his eyes dark. “I don’t like it.”

Hecor leaned toward the gray giant and whispered, “Evascor, I have this nagging sense that something is behind us, that we are being stalked. Is something following us?”

“Shh.”

Grawf paused, his hackles rising.

In the undergrowth behind them, leaves rustled softly, and came the sound of a horrible hissing and something big moving through the foliage. Evascor turned, a large rock in his hand that Hecto hadn’t seen him pick up. The stoney giant threw the rock. It streaked into the leaves and there came the sickening crunch of cracking bone, then a sizzling sound of something loathsome dissolving into goo. The forest fell silent.

“No, nothing is following us,” Evascor said.

Still, as they walked, Hecto was haunted by the brilliant green eyes from his dream.

In the late afternoon they came to a hillside covered thickly with gigantic trees. Grawf led them through the underbrush, and they approached a steep cliff. Hecto had the uncomfortable realization this place was familiar. They had been here before and walked past this spot.

Grawf led them to a gap between two stones and squeezed himself through. What Hecto thought was a cliff was actually a rocky ridge with more forest on the other side. Evascor went through, barely able to make his great frame fit. Hecto slipped through easily.

On the other side of the gap, the three made their way through the thick brush and descended, dropping into a small valley. Rushing of a waterfall sounded nearby.

They followed Grawf as the trees thinned. The huge beast led them around an outcropping of large stones where they discovered a wide pool of green, a waterfall from the rocks above pouring into it, and a bright beam of sunlight breaking through the trees and illuminating the pool.

Hecto was beside himself with excitement. He slapped Evascor’s cold, solid arm. “The Seer was right! Look: pool, waterfall, beam of sunlight.”

Evascor eyes were dark and he rumbled stonily.

Hecto, in his joy, turned and ruffled the fur of the lionbear’s mane. Grawf purred happily. Then Hecto caught himself and slowly pulled his hands back from the terrifying beast.

The young man dressed in red said, “OK let’s go find it!” He started to press forward, but Evascor put a hand out to stop him.

“Wait,” the stoney giant said. “Look.”

In the shade next to the pond, an enormous creature reclined. It was a tangle of green scales and orange fur, striped with black. It’s not right to say it was half tiger, half dragon, because there was no line where tiger stopped and the dragon started. Rather, there were bits of tiger and dragon scattered all over it. Hecto admitted to himself it looked rather stylish. It lay still, huge head resting on a scaly paw, eyes closed.

Hecto gasped. “A tigon! How did it get here? The Seer didn’t say anything about a guardian.”

Evascor mumbled, “Wouldn’t be the first time.”

The young man in red turned to Evascor. “Do you think you can vanquish it? Maybe you and Grawf together?”

Grawf gruffed uncertainly.

The stoney giant looked appraisingly at the monster, but before he could answer, the tigon raised his head, looked directly at them with strange purple eyes, and spoke.

“I can hear you. And, no. You couldn’t.”

The three fell silent.

The enormous green, orange, and black-striped beast spoke again. “Why don’t you come out here and talk to me, instead of trying to hide behind those trees?”

The three companions walked forward.

The monster spoke, its voice loud but eerily smooth. “Why are you here?”

Hecto’s mind swirled, but the best he could come up with was the truth. He raised his hands and sighed heavily. “We’re here for the golden dancer figurine.”

The monster’s rich purple eyes widened. “Ah! I want that too!”

“But ... I thought you were guarding it.”

The dragon nodded. “I am.”

“So ... you have it?”

“No.”

Evascor touched Hecto’s shoulder. “Hecto,” he said. “We don’t seem to be getting anywhere.” On Hecto’s other side, Grawf emitted a short gruff.

Hecto took a deep breath. “All right. So where is this treasure that you are guarding?”

The monster nodded toward the pool. “It’s in there, in a small wooden chest.”

“But I don’t understand. Why don’t you just go in and get it?”

“Water.” The monster shuddered from head to striped tail. “I hate water.”

Evascor exhaled heavily. “Well, at least we tried. Let’s go home.”

Hecto raised a hand. “No, wait. We can figure this out. So, you want the treasure but you can’t get it.”

The huge tigon nodded. “Correct.”

“I could go in the pool and get it--but then you would take it and eat me.”

“Yes, probably.”

Hecto snapped his fingers. “What if you promised not to eat me?”

“No, I don’t think so.”

“Interesting,” Hecto said, stroking his chin. “But ... if I don’t leave the pool, then you wouldn’t come in to get me.”

“Right, I hate water.”

“So, I could get the treasure, I just couldn’t leave the pool afterward.” He fell quiet, considering that possibility.

“Hecto,” Evascor said. “You can’t just stay in the pool.”

“I’m thinking.”

Evascor turned to the enormous creature. “Why do you want the golden dancer figurine? What good is it to you?”

“No one has ever asked me that before.” The creature blinked, then lowered his head. “To go to sleep. I can only fall asleep when there is music. But I can’t get anyone to play music or sing to me, because either they run away or I eat them. I haven’t slept for 100 years.” He lowered his head in very, very tired sorrow. “When I heard a party of travelers talking about the golden dancer, I knew I had to have it.”

The tigon sat up and appraised the small party before him. “Say, are you musicians by any chance?”

Evascor said, “We are not.”

Grawf emitted a short gruff to confirm.

Hecto said, “So you want the figurine because it will play music and not run away and not get eaten. Well, that does sound like a good idea. How long do you sleep for?”

“100 years.”

“All right, dragon my friend. I have decided that I will retrieve the golden dancer figurine and make it play music for you so you can sleep.”

The tigon’s face lit up with happiness.

Hecto stripped down to his undergarments, handing his red clothes to Evascor. “Hold on to these,” he said. “Because once the beast is asleep...”

Evascor nodded.

The young man turned and splashed into the chilling water of the pool. He gasped at the cold. The slope of the pool was steeper than he expected, and he struggled to keep his footing on the wet rocks. Under the waterfall, the green water turned black in its surprising depth. Hecto swam out to where the water was darkest, took a great breath, and dove under.

He forced himself deeper and deeper in the cold water. The water was murky---as he swam down, he could barely make out the bottom. He reached out and touched the cold silt. Swimming around, he searched for the small chest, but found nothing.

He turned and raced back to the surface of the pool, where he broke through the surface and drew in a huge breath of air.

All at the same time, the tigon asked, “Did you find it?” Evascor asked “Is it there?” and Grawf emitted an inquisitive roar.

Hecto wiped the water from his eyes. “I didn’t see it. I’ll try again.” He took a huge breath and plunged back into the icy water.

This time as he reached the bottom a vague figure appeared at the edge of his murky vision. He swam toward it. Suddenly before him in the dark water--the skeleton of a man in corroded armor, a sword clasped in one hand, its arms wrapped around a small wooden chest.

Hecto fought back a scream. He pushed his hands forward and grabbed the chest. The skeleton refused to release it, and Hecto had to use his full strength to get it free. Then he turned toward the surface and kicked as hard as he could to reach the light.

The wooden chest was heavy, and Hecto’s lungs were bursting. He felt the weight of the thing pulling him down. He kicked harder, his chest burning. He saw the surface before him, but the wooden chest was becoming heavier and heavier with each second.

He started to see black dots in front of him. He kicked hard, but the strength was leaving him. For a moment the thought occurred to him to let go of the thing, but then a tunnel of darkness enveloped him.

A huge furry mass appeared below, pushing him toward the surface. Hecto struggled to stay on top of it. In moments he broke through the surface and gasped for air. Grawf came up behind him, and nudged Hecto toward shallow water. Hecto reached out with his toes and felt the steep rocks. In a few moments, he was standing chest-deep in water, panting heavily, water dripping from his face.

“You got it!” cried the dragon.

Hecto nodded. Grawf paddled out of the pool, and stood on the bank. He shook his huge form mightily, creating a sudden rain shower.

The tigon shrank back from the storm. “Ew,” he said.

“The previous owner wasn’t as lucky,” Hecto said, walking to stand waist-high in the water. “But at least he died with his sword in his hand.” He worked at the corroded lock with his fingers, trying to pry it open.

“Oh, yes,” said the tigon. “It was quite rude of him to run into the pool. He deprived me of both the dancer figurine and a nice snack.”

Hecto gave up on the lock and dug his fingers into the ancient, rotted wood of the small chest. The wood gave way, and moments later, he was prying back the lid.

Inside was a small treasure. Gold coins stamped by a slew of kingdoms of long ago. Gems of every color imaginable, glittering in the sunlight striking the pool. Necklaces, rings and earrings of intricate design. Strings of pearls. Enough gold and jewels to provide for several lifetimes of luxurious living.

Buried in the glittering coins and gems was a golden figurine of a lady laughing and dancing. Her elegant dress of gold was adorned with shining gems. Her golden hair was made up in exotic fashion. Her beautiful golden face shone with a smile as bright and wonderful as the shaft of sunlight breaking through the trees.

Curious, Hecto saw that her eyes were tiny sapphires--blue, not green like in his dream.

He held the figurine up for the dragon to see. “Here it is!”

“Oh, yes! Yes that’s it! Now you must make it work so I can finally sleep!”

Hecto, Evascor, and Grawf exchanged a meaningful look, as if to say, be ready to run.

Hecto turned the figurine over and over. “How do I make it work?”

“Just set it down and it will play.”

Shivering, but careful to stay in the water, which the dragon hated, Hecto leaned toward a large rock that stuck out of the water, and carefully stood the dancer on it. After a moment, the gems on the dancer began to shine. Then the figurine began to spin and cast brilliant beams of colorful light all over, illuminating the dragon, Evascor, Grawf and Hecto.

Then elegant music filled the air, delightful dancing music that lifted Hecto’s spirits. It made him want to start spinning and dancing to the wonderful music, even though he was up to his waist in bone-chilling water.

“Ack! What is that?” cried the dragon.

“What?”

“That music! That’s dancing music! I can’t sleep to that!”

Hecto, Evascor and Grawf shared a look.

“Oh, this is terrible. Take it! Make it stop! This is awful. I don’t think I’ll ever get to sleep.”

Hecto snatched the golden dancer from the rock, and the colorful lights and music faded. “So ... you don’t want it?”

“No. It is worthless to me.”

“So, I’ll just put it back in the chest.” He did.

“Fine. I don’t care.”

“And we’ll just be on our way.”

The dragon reared up, towering over the pool. “No, I am hungry. Put down that chest and come out of the water.”

A thought occurred to Hecto. How had he missed it? He looked at Evascor and said, “Even’s Tides Iola?”

Evascor raised his eyebrows--to the extent his stoney head had eyebrows--and nodded.

Hecto began to sing in a clear heroic tenor. Evascor joined in, harmonizing in a deep, rumbling bass. Even Grawf contributed roars and barks in surprising harmony.

The tigon, looming horrifyingly over them, blinked in astonishment as the trio sang to him.

Even’s tides, Iola

The sun has gone to set

Welcome dreams, Iola

Now don your coronet

Morning’s break is distant

Bountiful fields of dreams

Even’s tides, Iola

For all that morn redeems

They had just started the second verse, when the tigon’s enormous head grew heavy, and slumped. His purple eyes dimmed and slid shut. Then his entire form fell to the ground with a heavy thud. He lay there, snoring loudly.

Hecto eased out of the water so as not to disturb the beast’s slumber, holding the wooden chest tightly. Without dressing, only pulling on his boots, he slipped into the forest. Evascor and Grawf followed. It was only when they had climbed the hill and made it through the gap in the stoney ridge that Hecto felt safe again.

Evascor said, “I’m glad the dragon didn’t eat you, Hecto.”

“I owe you thanks ... er ... Grawf.” Hecto reached out cautiously and gave the enormous lionbear a good scratch under a giant ear. Grawf closed his warm brown eyes in ecstasy.

Hecto sat and opened the chest. He took out the golden figurine.

Grawf leaned against Hecto, rubbing his coarse fur against him.

Hecto didn’t mind. He smiled, looking at the pretty golden dancer, with her elegant dress and bright, delighted smile. Without understanding why, he found himself wishing the dancer had green eyes.

----

The power of foresight is a gift to a treasure hunter, one that will lead to wondrous artifacts of incalculable value. To the seer, foresight can be the curse of knowing the path of destiny when it is too horrible to imagine. These thoughts whirled through the Seer’s mind as she looked up from her complicated scrying device, her brilliant green eyes wide with horror.

---

Hecto Safan and King Evascor of Mariguez walked down the street together. Birds sang and the brilliant sunlight warmed them. Hecto, a tall young man dressed in extravagant red traveling clothes, was particularly pleased with himself. He held a small golden figurine encrusted with glittering jewels: a beautiful woman laughing and dancing. He could not stop looking at it.

Beside him walked King Evascor--the king of the ancient kingdom of Mariguez--a giant creature in the shape of a man, eight or nine feet tall. The powerful being was made of stone interlaced with steel. Ornate curves of metal spiraled over his body and face, highlighting his stern features. The giant looked at Hecto with dark eyes and spoke in a voice that rumbled like a rock avalanche in a canyon. “I like your treasure, Hecto.”

The young man beamed. “Yes, it’s a good one isn’t it? Not the most powerful artifact we’ve found, but it may be my favorite.”

Evascor brought a dark-colored stone to his mouth and took a large bite. “Only two days until the Kingsmeet,” the gray giant said. He chewed, savoring the taste. “Tell me about it again. We didn’t have them before, when there was just one king.”

“Indeed, my friend. It will be a glorious occasion. Eight kings and their retinues assembling to talk of matters of state. And celebrating. Lots of celebrating, Evascor. Feasts, dancing, tankards of ale, bottles of wine, performers, and rare animals from around the world.”

Hecto grabbed the giant’s stoney arm. “It is our chance to present the Ruby of Mariguez and claim your kingdom. It will be marvelous--after eight hundred years of the ruby being lost, it will be the rebirth of the kingdom of Mariguez. The return of its glorious king. Imagine the looks on everyone’s faces! Destiny, Evascor, destiny!”

King Evascor smiled and took another bite. He patted a pouch on a shoulder strap that circled his giant chest. The pouch held the fist-sized Ruby of Mariguez, the key to the throne of the Mariguez kings.

Hecto said, “First a quick stop to show the Seer our latest treasure.”

The two came to the Seer’s shop. As usual, Evascor sat down in the street outside. They’d learned the hard way that his giant frame didn’t fit inside the cramped space with all its crowded bookshelves and scattered magical devices.

Hecto opened the door and stepped inside. “We are back. Look, we found the golden dancer, exactly where you said. Your description was excellent: pool, waterfall, beam of sunlight--and that’s right where it was.”

The Seer pulled down the hood of her cloak and affixed him with an intense gaze. Her luxurious hair fell down past her shoulders.

“I wish you’d told me about the beast who lived by the pool. That was a surprise. But it worked out--Evascor and I didn’t even need to draw our swords. It turns out the beast was easily lulled by singing, so we sang it to sleep and then took the prize.”

The Seer breathed heavily, her eyes wide.

“Here, I’ll show you.” Hecto placed the golden figurine on the floor. After a moment, it began to shine and cast out multicolored beams of light. Elegant music filled the room.

The young man turned and bowed low to the Seer. “May I have this dance, M’Lady?”

She pulled a black dagger from her cloak and attacked.

Astonished, Hecto danced away from the blade. “What are you doing!”

“I have to stop you,” said the Seer with a snarl.

Hecto dodged the dagger again. “Wait, I don’t understand!” His eyes grew wide as the dagger caught his sleeve. The fabric sizzled on contact--no ordinary blade. He grabbed an oversized book from a table to shield himself. When the Seer lunged, he caught the blade on the thick cover. The blade flared and left a long scorch on the book.

“Oh, come on!” he cried.

“I have to protect the king,” said the Seer.

She paused, reconsidering her strategy. Her intense green eyes did not leave Hecto as she returned the dagger to her cloak. She turned and took a thin bronze tube from a bookshelf.

“What does that do?” asked Hecto despairingly.

She brought the tube to her mouth and blew. An explosion of flame engulfed Hecto as he brought the book up as a shield. The force of the blast pushed him backward, knocking the door off its hinges. He fell into the street in a plume of smoke.

Evascor paused in taking a bite from the rock he was chewing. He looked at where Hecto lay smoldering. “Everything OK?” he asked.

Hecto jumped up and slapped his sleeves to put out the small fires. “We should go,” he said.

Evascor turned toward the door as the Seer came out. He managed to say, “What’s happening?” before she held up a gem that shone and dazzled in the stoney giant’s dark eyes. He raised a hand to shield his eyes. The Seer brought up her brass tube.

“Run!” Hecto cried from halfway down the street.

Blinded by the dazzling light, Evascor had no choice but to turn and follow him. Fiery blasts followed them as they spirited out of town.

---

The two walked down the road on a hillside in the bright sunlight toward the Kingsmeet. Hecto, his clothes still smoking, said, “All I did was ask her to dance.”

“Maybe she doesn’t like to dance,” observed Evascor.

“No, there was more to it than that. She said she had to protect you. But I don’t understand how I’m a threat.”

Evascor shrugged.

Hecto asked, “Hey, it’s mid-morning. Don’t you have your sword routine to practice?”

The stoney giant rumbled uneasily. He considered, then said, “No. There’s no routine today.”

Hecto groaned. “Oh, faith! I left the dancer figurine in the Seer’s shop. Well, after the Kingsmeet we’ll have to go back and see if she still wants to kill me.”

An arrow of pure light sailed between the two. It struck the road ahead of them and blasted a hole in the dirt a yard deep.

Hecto and Evascor turned to see the Seer riding toward them on a black steed. Her hood was down, her hair flowing in the wind. She held a glittering bow, sitting astride the horse in an expert horse archer’s stance. Her cloak billowed out behind her. The black stallion bore down on them relentlessly, his eyes wild. The steed looked enormous in comparison to her. When she drew near, she swung a leg over and slid from the horse to take an archer’s stance in the road.

“Wait,” cried Hecto. “Why --”

Without hesitating, the Seer let loose another arrow. It whistled through the air where Hecto’s head would have been if Evascor had not lifted him up and jumped off the road.

The giant slid down the hillside, angling for an outcropping of rocks. Above them, the Seer took aim for another shot, but the stoney giant was moving too fast. He loped down the hill with fluid slides and hops that were impossible to predict. Tumbling behind the rocks, the rocky created dumped Hecto ingloriously onto the ground.

The Seer shot again. The arrow struck the boulder shielding them, cracking it into pieces, throwing up a cloud of stone and dust.

“Into the trees,” Hecto said. He started to lift himself, but the gray giant scooped him up and bounded off toward the treeline.

Above them on the road, the Seer scowled and lowered her bow.

---

Hecto and Evascor huddled behind the trunk of a huge tree.

“I guess she really doesn’t like dancing,” Evascor said with as soft a voice as he could manage.

“Very funny.” Hecto grimaced. “I don’t understand. Why does she think I mean to do you harm? Does she think I’m plotting against you? That I mean to take the ruby and claim the throne for myself?”

“Are you?” asked Evascor, his eyes dark.

“Of course not,” Hecto said, a little too loudly. Then, more quietly, “Of course not. Besides, how would I even do that?”

Evascor smiled. “I know. I was just kidding.”

“No, everything is going according to plan. This is just an obstacle. Destiny is testing us. But we will succeed. All we have to do is slip past her. Once we’re in the city, the streets will be filled with soldiers for the Kingsmeet. She won’t be able to attack us there.”

The stoney giant said, “Maybe if you told her you’re not plotting against me, she wouldn’t kill you.”

Hecto thought. “She’s really quick with that bow. No. Your eyes and ...” He paused to look at the stoney giant’s head. “... ears are supernaturally sharp. We have the advantage, even with her skill with archery. No, I think the best thing is to slip around her and get to the city.”

Evascor paused, then whispered, as best he could whisper in his rumbling voice, “Hecto, is this what it feels like to be hunted?”

Hecto thought about his long experience evading bandits, pirates, monsters, and rival treasure hunters. He said, “Yes.”

---

They spent the afternoon creeping through the trees.

“Can you hear her?” Hecto asked.

“Yes. She’s that way, we should go here.”

More than once they emerged from their cover to find the Seer standing right in front of them taking aim, and had to double back. Evascor’s senses--the supernatural sight and hearing that had allowed him to guard the Ruby of Mariguez and keep it hidden for eight centuries--kept them out of her line of fire.

As the afternoon light waned, Hecto had a moment of despair. “Which way is the city? I think it’s this way.”

Evascor shook his head. “I don’t know. You’re a better traveler than I am.”

“I think we’ve gone in a circle.” He looked up through the trees at the sun to try to get a sense of direction. “Yes, the city is this way.” But the turmoil in his eyes belied the confidence of his voice.

They continued to move through the woods. Sometimes going forward, sometimes circling back. The forest provided enough trees and bushes to keep them safe.

The sun went down. Darkness fell. Hecto said, “No sense in trying to move in the dark. She has to be tired, too. Let’s find cover and you listen for her. We’ll make a run for it in the morning.”

Evascor nodded, listening intently for the Seer.

He didn’t intend to, but Hecto dozed off, leaning on the stoney giant’s arm. He woke with a start as the sun rose. He sat bolt upright and looked at his giant companion in a panic.

“It’s OK,” said Evascor. “She’s been quiet all night long. I think she knows we’re not moving.”

Hecto flinched as a painful thought wracked his brain. “She’s a Seer.”

“What?” asked Evascor.

“She’s a Seer. You have your eyes and ears, but she can see glimpses of the future. She hasn’t been hunting us, she’s been herding us.”

The two looked at each other for a long moment.

Evascor said, “I can hear a river nearby.”

“Let’s make for that then. We can move faster than her--it may be our biggest advantage. If we go between trees on the riverbank, we can get ahead and then break clear and follow the river into the town.”

Evascor nodded and stood. He reached out to give Hecto his hand to help the young man up.

There was a flash, and an explosion. Evascor’s right arm snapped and broke off at the elbow. He and Hecto turned to see the Seer, beside a tree not far away, aiming her bow.

Hecto scrambled to his feet, and ran into the forest to get behind another tree. Evascor followed him.

There was another flash, and another explosion, and most of Evascor’s right thigh flew into the air as stoney chips of rock. He hopped on his left leg to where Hecto was leaning against a giant tree trunk.

“How did she get there?” Hecto was panting with exertion and shock.

“I didn’t hear her.”

Hecto slapped his forehead. “Boots of Laranebrax. They allow one to walk on air, and they swallow any noise the wearer makes. But they are useless because they are unreliable. You never know when the magic is going to stop and send you crashing noisily to the ground. Still a fun party trick.”

“She is a Seer,” Evascor reminded him.

Hecto exhaled sharply. “Of course. Of course she knows how far she can get before the magic stops.”

“How did she get the boots?”

“I gave them to her last year at the harvest festival, as a gift.”

Evascor shook his head. “This doesn’t feel like a fair fight.”

“Come on, let’s get to the river.”

Evascor hopped along, trying not to put too much weight on his broken, twisted leg. His half-arm waved in the air.

Hecto stopped and held a hand out and asked him, “You’re hurt. Can I give you a hand?”

Evascor chuckled. “Can you? I’m pretty heavy.”

The young man in red looked back to see if the Seer was following. “And why in all faith did she attack you? I thought the whole point was to protect you.”

Evascor shrugged. “Maybe she wants the ruby for herself.”

“She is really quick with that bow. I’d like to get a closer look at it. We really don’t know anything about her before she opened shop as a Seer.” He pondered. “Maybe she’s an assassin as well.”

The stoney giant frowned. “Still, this is a funny way to protect me.” He paused to twist his mangled leg so it faced forward. He hopped to catch up. “Hecto, she has three arrows left.”

“What?”

“I saw her quiver. She has three arrows left.”

Hecto nodded. “Well, if we can get her to miss twice, then one of us has a fighting chance to get to the Kingsmeet.”

They moved from tree to tree with no sight or sound of the Seer.

Hecto broke out of the forest and saw the river before him. “We made it,” he said. “I hope we’ve left her behind. Now we just have to follow the river to the city.”

Evascor limped along behind him. Even with one of them damaged, he covered a lot of ground with his long legs.

The stoney giant said, “She has a strange look in her eyes.”

“Yes, I noticed. Almost like she’s been ensorcelled. But who would do that? What is their goal? Is there someone who opposes your rise to the throne?”

Evascor shrugged.

They followed the river, occasionally ducking behind a tree on the bank to look back for the Seer. But there was no sight nor sound of her.

“And there is your treasure,” Evascor said.

Hecto blinked. “That’s true. She attacked me the moment I activated the dancer. None of the scrolls said anything about it being cursed. What have I done, Evascor? Have I drawn a terrible curse down on us? What about our destiny?”

The young man looked back down the river, and saw nothing except the calm bank and the flowing water. “I think we have enough of a lead. We should make a run for it.”

Evascor nodded, hobbling along behind him.

They followed the river through a rocky section where the water got choppy with white surges. The river sounded louder in their ears. The choppy water turned into rapids. Getting along the bank became hard as stones jutted out, dropping off into the deep, fast-moving water.

Hecto, a little ahead of Evascor, came to a flat rocky shelf. The roaring of the water increased. He stopped, his face dropping.

“What is it?” asked his giant companion.

“Waterfall,” said Hecto.

---

Before them, the water rushed off into the air and plummeted far down into a treacherous pool studded with sharp rocks. The waterfall was on a high cliff that extended a long way in either direction.

Evascor hobbled over and caught up with Hecto. “That’s a tall one.”

They turned and saw the Seer step out onto the bank behind them. The bright sun shone on her. Her hood was down, her cloak thrown back, her hair flying in the wind coming from the waterfall. She looked at Hecto and Evascor with her sharp green eyes and raised her bow to take aim.

Evascor saw her face was wet with tears. “She’s been crying.”

Hecto called over the roar of the waterfall, “Why are you doing this? I don’t understand.”

“I have to,” she called back.

“Are you ensorcelled? An assassin? Acting under a curse? Or just greedy? What is it?”

“I have to protect the king.”

“But you shot the king,” Hecto cried, pointing at Evascor’s broken arm and leg.

There was an awkward silence.

The Seer called, “Oh, no, wait. Not that king. Not Evascor. Our king, King Nolarad.”

“But we’re not going to harm the king. We’re going to the Kingsmeet to greet him.”

“Hecto, what do you think is going to happen? The ruby has been missing for eight hundred years. What happens when you walk into a Great Hall full of kings with their knights and soldiers, and tell them that Evascor is the true king?”

Hecto and Evascor turned and gave each other a long look.

The Seer continued, her voice breaking with emotion. “I’ll tell you what happens. I’ve seen it. King Nolarad and the other kings dead. All eight hacked to pieces. Dozens of knights and soldiers in piles on the floor, their bodies broken and dismembered. So much blood it makes a pool over the floor of the Great Hall. Blood everywhere, splashed on the walls and even the ceiling. You know Evascor has the might to kill them all.

“Hecto, this is the future I saw: heads, bodies, blood. You know my sight is true. Evascor will not be the King of Mariguez, he will be the Bloody Tyrant of Mariguez.”

Evascor rumbled uneasily.

Hecto said, “But what if it doesn’t happen that way? Our destiny. The destiny of the Ruby of Mariguez. We can make it happen in a way that avoids any fighting.”

“But you can’t. That’s not your destiny. I’ve seen your destiny, and it is violence and horror.”

She raised her bow and took aim at Hecto’s heart.

“We’ll find a way,” Hecto cried.

“You won’t. I’ve seen it.”

Evascor leaned over and picked up a large round rock. Even with his left hand, the Seer was an easy target.

Hecto grabbed his wrist. “It’s the Seer. Can you throw the rock so it doesn’t kill her, just wounds her?”

The stoney giant looked at the large rock, and shook his head. “I don’t think so.”

Hecto cried out, “But our destiny. I know we can find a way.”

The Seer blinked away tears. “I know you do, Hecto. I know that you’ll try. But I can’t let you. Your destiny is bloodshed.”

She took aim and said, so softly that only Evascor could hear it, “I’m sorry.”

With his dark eyes, Evascor looked at Hecto, then at the Seer. He spoke, his rumbling voice like a sudden thunderstorm rolling in.

“We control our own destiny.”

He lifted the rock and took a big bite. It tasted delicious.

---

Three figures--one small, one tall, and one giant--sat on a stone outcropping on a hill overlooking the city. Behind them, a black stallion nibbled contently on the grass.

The giant one, Evascor, said in his thundering voice, “Hecto, you think my destiny is down there, in the Kingsmeet. Seer, you think your deadly vision is my destiny.” He held the brilliant Ruby of Mariguez up and watched it glitter in the sunlight. “I think my destiny is to be king in a place that doesn’t already have a king.”

The Seer’s brilliant green eyes brightened. “Oh! That’s a great idea. I will Look for such a place.”

Hecto’s shoulders slumped.

Down in the city, the kings’ retinues filled the streets with bright livery, colorful plumed helmets, and flags. The kings proceeded toward the Great Hall for the Kingsmeet. Some of them strode on foot, waving to adoring townsfolk. Some rode through the streets in grand carriages decorated with banners and feathers in brilliant colors. Animal trainers held strong chains leading fierce lionbears, long-necked firelizards, and other exotic and terrifying creatures. Jugglers and stilt walkers paraded up and down. Even from up on the hill, the three companions could see townsfolk lining the streets, laughing, cheering, and taking great drinks from oversized tankards.

“They’re having fun,” said Evascor.

Hecto exhaled a heavy breath.

The Seer asked, “What about your arm and leg, Evascor? I’m so sorry.”

The giant shrugged. “They’ll grow back. They always do.”

Hecto said, “That bow. Is it the Bow of Barerafi?”

The Seer replied, “Triple speed nock.”

“Adjustable far-sight window.”

“Truing hunting stabilizer.”

“Scrying peep sight.”

“Sound-eater string silencer.”

Hecto nodded. “Nice.”

The Seer nodded.

She sat up straight and said, “Oh, I almost forgot. You left this. You owe me a dance.” She pulled something from her cloak and handed it to Hecto--a golden figurine of a beautiful lady laughing and dancing.

